---
title: "GRAL"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/GRAL"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.0
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\WP\MONAS\GRAL

General Education 1991

I voted against the document approved by the Academic Policies Committee because I have serious misgivings concerning the idea of thematic clusters in the GE program. Since the Senate is a deliberative body, not a rubber-stamping body. I propose that, before approving the document, we deliberate about what we are approving. If many people blame President Bush for not having taken into consideration the consequences of his appeal to topple Sadam Hussein before making his appeal, I am afraid we will deserve to be blamed if we approve the introduction of thematic clusters into the program without considering the consequences it might entail.

Though, considered in itself the idea of thematic courses sounds great for it aims at promoting integration, I think that its implementation in a truly workable program is highly problematic. I will explain why.

- The idea of thematic clusters came from a pilot program that worked under very different conditions than our GE program. The pilot program involved comparatively very few students and very few faculty. The faculty involved had reduced teaching loads, small groups of students, ample time to talk with each other to develop integrated courses, and the people who designed the courses were themselves the ones who taught the courses they had planned together. This cannot not be the case in the GE program, whose thematic clusters would involve more than 5,000 students and a very large number of faculty. What will happen, then? The document says that "selected faculty" will plan the clusters. Does this mean, for instance, that three or four members of three or four Departments will get together and create a cluster, and that the other members of the Departments involved in that cluster will have to teach a course according to specifications dictated by the preferences of three or four faculty members? Or that many teams of faculty from different Departments will develop clusters, which of course would raise the price of "faculty plannig time" and complicate enormously the actual implementation? The document is very vague concerning such important matters.

- The problem is compounded by the vagueness of the themes. As examples of themes for clusters we have such all-encompassing words as, for instance, "leadership." Assuming that such a theme can be an appropriate basis for integration of knowledge, the

theme is so open-ended that practically any subject-matter and any content can go under that name. It is obvious that two clusters on the theme of leadership designed by two different teams would be totally different, not only as to the content of the courses but even as to the Departments involved. This means that the preferences of the people actually involved in designing a cluster will determine what a large number of faculty in the concerned Departments will have to teach. There is every reason to think that this will be perceived by those Departments and faculty members as a rather arbitrary imposition. I doubt not only that real integration but even any real benefit will accrue to our students from courses taught under such conditions, and that the results will justify the money and the time involved in developing that kind of clusters.

- The document submitted for approval has not a word to say as to the number of clusters aimed at and the ideal distribution of clusters among Departments. Given that at a certain point more than 5,000 students will be enrolled in one cluster or another, I consider this a very significant deficiency for it makes any calculation of costs impossible. If there are too few clusters, large numbers of sections of the courses of that cluster will have to be taught by certain Departments in order to absorb the number of students that have to take them. Will the Departments involved have the resources to teach those courses? Will the university invest the funds to enable those Departments to teach those courses without sacrificing the variety of courses they have to offer to service their majors and minors? On the other hand, if there are too many clusters, we will have high costs in the development of courses by teams of faculty members, as well as bureaucratic problems in their implementation. But what is "too few" or "too many" clusters? Nobody has any idea. I understand how difficult this calculation is. But, surely, a document that legislates on a program to be implemented has to involve some notion of the ideal case to be aimed at and some notion of the extremes to be avoided, so that the appropriate number and kind of clusters may be developed.

- Finally, if in the past we failed to achieve any significant level of integration in just three "base" courses taught by the Departments of Religious Studies, Philosophy, and History, what makes us believe that we will do better working in a far larger scale that involves more people and more Departments?  

For the reasons given, I am very sceptical about the idea of thematic clusters in GE. Nonetheless, if the questions I have raised and other questions other people may raise can be satisfactorily answered, I will be very happy to vote for the

approval of the document. If, however, for the moment there is no satisfactory answer to these questions, I think that we should provisorily approve the document as it refers to the base, and postpone approval of the document as it refers to the clusters. According to Dean Morman's projections, the Departments of Religious Studies, Philosophy, and History should have developed their "base" courses within the coming year. At that time, after serious examination of what is proposed by those Departments, we should have a final vote on the base. In the meantime, the Academic Policies Committee should submit either a more detailed and persuasive exposition of the way in which the thematic courses would be developed and implemented and the difficulties avoided, or a less ambitious but more practical alternative concerning the courses of GE which are not part of the base.
