---
title: "JOURN"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/JOURN"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.0
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

This class has been of particular interest to me because in the past year to two years I have been struggling with what I want to do with the rest of my life.  As of late I have come to realize that the job I hope to attain in the near future will probably not be the job with which I remain throughout my life.  I am amazed that predictions for the generation now entering the job market can expect to have as many as seven career changes during their life.  For me that is both a frightening and exhilarating thought.  Frightening because I am still so unsure of what it is I want to do within the next few years and exhilarating because I realize that I have so many choices.

The idea that job change could be looked upon as a "good" thing has only just become a revelation of sorts in my life.  Within the last few months finding "a" job has been my major concern.  I have had the luxury of picking and choosing things that might be of interest and eliminating those possibilities that did not fit.  The "elimination" process has been very frustrating for me.  Several times I found myself quitting jobs that I had once thought would fit with my personality because I realized that the job was not what I wanted.  One extremely telling example of this was my introduction into the world of hotels.  Because I consider myself to be a "people person" and enjoy getting to know people I "assumed" that working in a hotel might be interesting and fill some of my need for adventure.  What I found was that being a hotel desk clerk was not as "fun and exciting" as I had once thought.  A job I had perceived to be a way of meeting exciting people, turned out to be nerve-wracking.  I learned that making reservations is only "fun" when I'm the one going someplace, that people can be very rude on the phone (I should have known that from doing tele-marketing!) and that standing up for eight hours straight is not my idea of a career.  During my endless job search I also looked into working in a group home with people with developmental disabilities.  Again uncertainties caused me to look in other directions.  

I tried not to limit myself to just jobs considered to be in the "helping profession."  I looked at sales jobs, tried tele-marketing (hated it) and other jobs that did not fit with my psychology background.  It is funny how jobs I once thought were "below" me were suddenly serious options.  This in itself scared me.  I knew I had the ability and the desire to perform certain jobs, but would not have a chance to use those capabilities unless I continued my education.  I realized that I missed school and that I should not let my doubts about career choice hold me back.  

I now understand that I should look at school and my masters program   not as something that is going to "force" me into a definite career but as something that will aid me in making decisions in a field with infinite options.  I have become more aware of all of my options in just listening to the variety of career paths the other students in the class have chosen.

I can relate to the depression of unemployment that has been discussed and seen on videos in class.  I have felt the high of thinking I will get a job, the dissappointment in not getting it and the loss of self esteem due to not finding a job.  I know what it is like to have people judge one upon their job or lack there of and not be looked at as a worthwhile contributor to society.  I often felt like because I did not hold a job or go to school I had nothing to offer my friends or family.  I felt myself withdrawing because I no longer wanted to defend my choices.   If I am honest going back to school is a way of "buying time" in terms of finding my niche.  I still am unsure in what direction I want to go with counseling, but I am willing to take the time to find out.  

Unemployment itself has been quite a learning process.  I have learned that I want security in my life!  I still believe I am somewhat of a risk-taker, but not as much as before.  I believe I could still "pack up the truck" but not without a friend.  I know this because in a sense I did "pack up the truck" in January of this year.  During my time off from school I went to Los Angeles in the hopes of finding a job.  The month long adventure gave me back some of my confidence in that I was offered a job and realized I could survive with my undergraduate degree.  It also made me realize that going far away was not an answer to the looming question of "what am I going to do with the rest of my life?"   Sure I had shown that I could be independent but I sacrificed the closeness I had with family and friends in the process, something I value more than I once believed.  And so I returned to Ohio.

I know now that my feelings of confusion are not different than that of many people who are entering and/or are currently in the work world.  I am not alone in both the panic of being in the wrong field or the panic of unemployment.  I am also not alone in taking steps to find out what it is I want to do.

This past year had been motivating in the sense that I know I cannot "wait" for things to happen, but instead have to make them happen.  I believe I have a different attitude about what I have to do.  I was hit in the face with reality (over and over) this past year.  I never realized how difficult, how emotionally draining it is to look for a job- and then work at a job one detests.  I know I am very sheltered in that I have been given the opportunity to find out what it is I want to do.  I have had the security of parental support, both financially and emotionally.  I realize that the depression and desperation I felt in all likelihood does not compare to someone who has experience, has lost their job and has no support system.  But I do know that unemployment is not enjoyable no matter your level of experience, age or education.

Obviously I am not the only college educated person to have found herself unemployed after graduation.  It has become increasingly difficult for students to find post graduate employment.  Many find that continuing into graduate education is a way of becoming more marketable.  I know that many students enrolled in graduate programs are here because they want to gain just such marketability.  

Based on the newspaper articles it is quite clear that the job market is changing and moving into new directions.  Unfortunately because of the technology driven foundation, many workers are finding themselves unemployed.  Jobs that were previously thought to be secure are now becoming obsolete.  The age of technology is in high gear and many adults, as well as their children are paying the price.

Minority issues are now becoming more of a focus of attention in our society.  Women continue in their struggle to be valued in the workplace.  Gays are "coming out" and thrusting our society into acceptance of alternative lifestyles.  Stereotypes concerning gender, race and age continue to have an effect on the publics view of how well a person will perform in the work world and in life.     

Issues concerning our health have also become more apparent.  The focus on weight issues as well as diseases such as AIDS and cancer have caused many to make lifestyle changes.

This class has made me aware that almost all issues dealt with in the news have relevance to career and lifestyle decision making and in turn relevance to counselors.  The class has also made me more aware of my own personal issues and their relevance and use to me in a counseling setting.
