---
title: "96-AUG-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1996/96-AUG-1.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


\wp\chant\96-aug-1                           August 15, 96
                 Histories, Stories, and Statements
      "... quia textus hic de ore Dei et sanctorum  allatus  mundo,  et  ita
est magnus ut vix sufficeret aliquis lector ad perlegendum eum in tota  vita
sua, secundum quod magistri legunt. Deinde  sancti  doctores  non  usi  sunt
nisi hoc textu; neque sapientes antiqui, quorum  aliquos  vidimus,  ut  fuit
dominus Robertus episcopus Lincolniensis... quia vero Alexander fuit  primus
qui legit; et tunc legebatur  aliquando,  sicut  liber  Historiarum  solebat
legi, et adhuc legitur rarissime. Et mirum est quod sic exaltatus est  liber
Sententiarum, quia liber Historiarum  est  magis  proprius  theologiae.  Nam
prosequitur textum a principio usque ad finem,  exponendo  ipsum.  Et  liber
Sententiarum  non  adheret  textui,  sed  vagatur  extra  textum  per  modum
inquisitionis." Rogeri Baconis Opus Minus, p. 329).
      Such reading-understanding of the Bible ceased in the schools--not  in
the  predication  at  church--  with  the  advent  of  Aristotelianism   and
scientific theology with their exclusive  interest  in  justified  objective
truth and, therefore, in statements. The consequences of  such  change  were
not at the time, and perhaps have not not even yet, been  measured.  I  want
to return to this subject.
The Summae Theologiae
      The Summae are textbooks composed of "sentences" (though  not  anymore
of the Church Fathers' sentences). Sentkences  are  judgments  expressed  in
statements. The Summae express their  authors'  beliefs  as  to  how  things
stand, supported by what the respective authors consider  to  be  sufficient
reason for their own assent to their sentences. They are, therefore, of  the
form "it is true that..." In turn, the authors look for intellectual  assent
on their readers' part, an assent based on the same reasons they  themselves
find assent-demanding or even assent-compelling.
      The subject-matter of the Summae is theological, that is,  matters  of
faith or related to faith. Insofar as the sentences
express, at least in certain  cases,  objects  or  articles  of  faith,  and
insofar as those sentences are taken  as  objects  of  intellectual  assent,
what is revealed is deemed to be object of assent and, correlatively,  faith
is necessarily taken to consist in intellectual assent.*
* This shows clearly in light of the  problems  created  by  the  fact  that
cognitum (something assented to on the basis of evidence)  non  potest  esse
creditum (something assented to on the basis of God's authority). Faith  and
knowledge  are  mutually  exclusive  precisely  because  faith  consists  in
intellectual assent on  the  basis  of  God's  authority  whereas  knowledge
consists in intellectual assent on the basis of compelling evidence.
**    It is important to remark that at least some of the articles of  faith
dealt with in the Summae are 'historical' facts or events, such  as  "passus
et sepultus est." (By historical I mean referring to corporeal--rather  than
purely spiritual--, temporal--rather than atemporal-permanent--, existents--
rather than concepts.  Now,  Aris'  intellectualistic  epistemology  has  no
room for the 'historical,' if for no  other  reason  because  only  what  is
intelligible is object of (scientific)  knowledge,  and  the  historical  is
constituted by contingent, singular, surd facts or events. A second  and  no
less important reason is that the 'historical,  as  'storical'  or  narrated
dramatically, is not object of assent but object of encounter.
      Given that the Summae, as any 'scientific' textbook,  aim  exclusively
at eliciting intellectual assent (be it to an explanatory concept  or  to  a
general fact or to a particular historical existent), the most and the  best
that Summae can lead to, in case of full  success,  is  intellectual  assent
and assertion on the reader's part. Such is the  nature  of  all  scientific
textbooks, of which the  Summae Theologiae are a particular variety.
Statements and narratives
      Let us now  turn  our  attention  to  the  Bible,  in  particular  the
biblical narratives. Or let us, rather, start with any narrative. No  matter
what the context, a statement expresses an assent by the speaker  or  writer
to the fact that things standas stated. If what I want to do is  to  express
how things stand, according to me, I have to  make  a  statement.  I  cannot
express how things stand in any other way; nothing but a statement  will  do
for that purpose. Correspondingly, as a hearer, if I am a competent user  of
language, there is only so much  I  can  do  appropriately  in  relation  to
statements as such, precisely  because  they  state  how  things  stand  and
nothing else: grasp what they  state  about  how  things  stand;  assent  or
dissent; contest, deny, or affirm their truth. The  latter  is  particularly
important here. Indeed, according to the medievals,  only  statements  among
all linguistic acts are true or false, because only statements  claim  truth
by affirming or denying how things stand. As I cannot disobey  a  statement,
for a statement is not an imperative, so I  cannot  deny  the  truth  of  an
order, for orders do not claim to be  true  or  false.  Imperatives  can  be
obeyed or disobeyed because they demand obedience; however, they  cannot  be
assented to or rejected as false. Only statements state  how  things  stand,
only statements demand assent, and only statements can be true or false.
      How do narratives compare to statements in terms of truth or  falsity?
Narratives are certainly different in this  regard.  If  a  statement  is  a
statement, it expresses how things are as well  as  the  commitment  of  the
speaker to things being as stated. In other words, categorical  'scientific'
statements, by their very nature, do not only affirm how  things  stand  but
also affirm their own truth. In other words,  because  they  are  reflective
acts, they are of the form "It is true that..."  Of course their  truth  can
be contested, but it can be  appropriately  contested  only  because  it  is
implicitly affirmed in the statement itself.*
* The medievals' theory of truth is ambivalent. On the  one  hand  it  is  a
property of judgments-statements. As such it is based on sufficient  reason,
on assent-demanding  reason,  and  it  refers  to  the  case  of  scientific
statements. On the other hand,  truth  is  adaequatio  mentis  ad  rem.  The
adaequatio consists in likeness, in resemblance between  mind  and  reality,
for there is such a thing as "material truth,"  in  which  case  nothing  is
stated (as in perception).
      The case of narratives is different. I can narrate without  affirming,
either implicitly or explicitly, the truth of what  I  narrate.  A  narrator
may be legitimately asked whether what  he  or  she  narrates  is  true,  or
whether or not he or she means it as true, precisely  because  narrating  is
not stating, and a narrative is not a statement.  A  novelist  narrates  but
does not affirm--or, for that matter, deny  either--the  truth  of  what  is
narrated. A narrative can refer  to  something  real  or  imaginary,  but  a
narrative, of itself, does neither affirm nor deny the reality  of  what  is
narrated. Because there is no affirmation or negation involved, a  narrative
cannot, strictly speaking, be true or false. A statement means to  say  that
things stand as stated, and a scientific statement means to show that it  is
true that things are as stated so as to elicit the reader's  assent.  But  a
narrative does not intend to  say  that  it  is  true  that,  much  less  to
demonstrate that it is true  that,  since  it  neither  affirms  nor  denies
anything. Unlike statements, narratives have  no  "content"  separable  from
what is narrated, because they do not narrate that.
      Thus, Aristotle and the Scholastics were right: truth and falsity  are
exclusive properties of judgments and,  derivatively,  of  their  linguistic
expression, which is statements. Since narratives are not  statements,  they
are neither true nor false. But if statements mean to say how things  stand,
and narratives are not statements, what do narratives mean to say?
      Statements can be in the present, in  the  past,  or  in  the  future.
Narratives can only be in the past in respect of the time  of  the  narrator
and, consequently, of the time of his or her  present  or  future  audience.
The reason is that narratives, whatever the context in which they  are  told
and the purposes for which they are told, are a structuring of the (real  or
imaginary) past of people then involved in  temporal,  desirous  interaction
with their surroundings.
      From the  typical  temporality  of  narratives  it  follows  that  the
narrator, unlike the people involved in the  narrative,  knows  the  end  or
outcome and can therefore structure the narrative  in  many  different  ways
depending on his or her purposes. Human life may  be  potentially  narrative
in the sense that it is, to a  degree  at  least,  lived  intentionally  and
reflectively, but it is not itself  a  narrative  and  is  only  potentially
narratable, for when actually narrated it is not a lived life anymore but  a
narrated life with a definite outcome that was desirable or  undesirable  to
the people involved, and desirable or undesirable to  the  audience  of  the
narrative.
      The purpose of scientific statements  that  express  judgments  is  to
state the truth as to how things stand in order to  elicit  assent-agreement
to the truth of the statement. Supposedly the purpose-meaning of  statements
is simply to say how things stand (cf. Searle) in order that  it  be  simply
understood by the addressee or the hearer how things stand according to  the
speaker. Since they have no intrinsic  perlocutionary  effect  they  fulfill
their function by being understood. But what is the meaning,  the  intrinsic
purpose, of narratives?
      The most one can say in answer to this question is that their  purpose
is not to say that (that is, to paint) things stand like  this  or  that  so
that this be understood and at  best  assented  to,  but  to  expose  people
imaginatively to the past life of  certain  people.  Hence  understanding  a
narrative is not like understanding a chronicle, grasping  a  mere  sequence
of events, but  coparticipating  affectively  with  the  characters  in  the
dramatic events in which they were involved.  Registering  events  factually
amounts to not understanding a  narrative,  whereas  supposedly  registering
factually how things stand according to a speaker amounts  to  understanding
a statement, for that is what statements supposedly mean to achieve.
      The point I am driving at is that, since the biblical  narratives  are
not statements, much less scientific  statements  in  a  textbook,  but  are
dramatic narratives, understanding them as other than  narratives,  treating
them  as  statements   or   equivalent   to   statements,   amounts   to   a
misunderstanding full of consequences. Now, it  is  my  suspicion  that  the
intellectualistic epistemology borrowed  by  the  medievals  from  Aristotle
constrained  them  to  understand  divine   revelation   in   general,   and
particularly as told in the Bible,  as  composed  of  implicit  or  explicit
statements. In other words, they transformed the basically  narrative  genre
of the Bible into the indirect style of  an  objective  contemplator-hearer,
on the assumption that the two were functionally equivalent.  And  they  had
to assume that, because they could not save the truth of  divine  revelation
otherwise.
      The Bible is treated by the medievals as a collection  of  statements.
Indeed, given that a narrative is not a statement, for  it  does  not  state
how things are, it would, therefore, seem inappropriate  to  ask  whether  a
narrative is true or false, or to affirm or contest its  truth,  since  only
statements are true or false. Yet, this is often  done,  very  evidently  in
the case of the biblical narratives. Secondly,  only  if  divine  revelation
consists in statements can it be true or false, and only in  that  case  can
the act of faith consist in  intellectual  assent.  However,  the  Bible  is
deemed to contain God's revelation, and God's revelation  to  be  true.  How
can this be, given that the Bible is fundamentally narrative  and  that,  in
any  case,  an  enormous  proportion  of  the  Bible  does  not  consist  in
statements? Thirdly, given  the  preceding,  did  not  the  transition  from
narrative theology ("sicut liber Historiarum  solebat  legi")  to  assertive
theology ("quia vero Alexander fuit primus qui legit"),  carried  out  under
the influence of Aristotle's works, involve  an  absurd  mixture  of  genres
with absurd consequences? THESE ARE THE ISSUES I WANT TO EXPLORE HERE.
Aristotles' intellectualism
      With the  Aristotelian  corpus  the  medievals  found  themselves  (1)
confronted  with  a  written  text  composed  of  statements,  (2)  with   a
scientific text offering reasons for the statements in order to  elicit  the
readers' assent, and (3) with an epistemological text that  maintained  that
only statements  of  the  kind  contained  in  the  text  itself  (that  is,
statements expressing reflective judgments based on sufficient  and  ideally
compelling reason) were susceptible of truth and falsity.
      The medievals bought this epistemology, and enacted it in the  Summae,
though with a very significant modification. These  textbooks,  while  being
'scientific,' are  theological,  not  philosophical,  because  they  contain
propositions supported on the  basis  of  God's  authority  rather  than  of
assent-demanding or assent  compelling  evidence.  Furthermore,  the  Summae
explicitly   maintain   that   such   propositions   are   epistemologically
acceptable.
      Having bought this epistemology, the medievals did not only  enact  it
in their Summae,  which  represent  their  conception   of  the  theological
endeavor as a scientific, but shaped their  notions  of  revelation  and  of
faith  along  Aristotlian  lines.  Thus,  they  saw  divine  revelation   as
constituted by divine judgments-statements, and  the  act  of  faith  as  an
intellectual act of assent to what God reveals.*  This  necessarily  blinded
them to the historical structure of revelation, or at least forced  them  to
see the historical as kreducible to statements.
* Moreover, they saw the revealing God as a teacher  of  already  discovered
truths. Except that  God  teaches  authoritatively,  without  giving  assent
demanding reasons,  that  is,  sithout  supporting  evidence.  Such  is  the
"deposit of faith," for the most part contained in the Bible. The  functions
of theology properly  so  called  were  (a)  to  make  a  reasoned,  orderly
catalogue of what God had revealed; (b) to justify  that  God  had  actually
revealed it, so that it was genuine object of faith, thereby  distinguishing
it from pious or impious credulity; (c) to reduce it, as much  as  possible,
from a forest of divine statements to a synthetic intelligible  system;  (d)
to defend the deposit of faith  against  all  attacks,  and  to  defend  the
people of God from being misled. The function of philosophical theology  was
to support with demonstrative evidence whatever in  the  revealed  could  be
demonstrated so as to make it known rather than taken  on  God's  authority,
and to support with probable or  merely  persuasive  evidence  (à  la  Saint
Anselm) whatever in the revealed could be made rationaly  persuasive  so  as
to make it as intelligible  and  understood  as  possible.  The  correlative
function of theological philosophy  (later  theodicy)  was  to  demonstrate,
starting from below, that is, from the pure use of  reason,  whatever  could
be demonstrated regarding God and religious matters.
      The Aristotelian epistemology just alluded to is intellectualistic  in
that it is centered  on  truth,  which  is  itself  seen  as  the  exclusive
property of an intellectual act, namely, the  judgment.  Unlike  perception,
which may be correct--that is, adequated to  the  real--but  does  not  know
whether or not it itself is  correct  and  therefore  does  not  qualify  as
knowledge, judgment is a reflective act, in that not only does it know  what
is the case but knows its own truth about what is the case by  knowing  that
it is  grounded  on  sufficient  reason.*  According  to  this  view,  then,
knowledge cannot be anything other than true judgment.

* Notice that  "reason"  means  something  intelligible,  which  is  another
aspect of Aristotle's intellectualistic epistemology, at least of  Aristotle
as understood by the medievals. In  other  words,  only  that  can  work  as
sufficient  reason,  that  is,  as  assent-compelling  evidence,  which   is
universal and necessary.

Can perception  be true or false?
       It  would  follow  from  this  intellectualistic  epistemology  that,
lacking intellect, animals are incapable of knowing--and even that  what  is
perceivable but not itself intelligible is, strictly  speaking,  unknowable.
Yet, unlike stones or even plants, animals obviously perceive. How can  they
be classified as simply unknowing, as if they were  stones  or  plants?  One
way out of this difficulty, open  to  Aristotle,  is  to  say  that  animals
possess  material  but  not  formal  knowledge.  That  is,  sometimes  their
perception is correct, as human perception sometimes is, and then they know-
-at least know quod; but since animals cannot judge, they cannot  know  that
they know even when they know. In this sense, they  do  not  formally  know,
for though their perceiving mind is adequated to  the  object  they  do  not
know that. That is why animals  do  not  make  statements,  for  only  those
creatures capable of judging can claim that  they  know,  that  it  is  trut
that, for only they grasp the truth of their knowledge,  the  adequation  of
their mind to the object.
      Speaking of human perception Aristotle grants  that  it  sometimes  is
materially true, in that it is adequate to the real, though he  denies  that
it formally is knowledge. Thus, as I just did, this notion can  be  extended
to the case of animals in order to explain the sense in  which,  as  far  as
knowledge is  concerned,  they  differ  from  stones  and  plants.  Clearly,
however, Aris' intellectualistic epistemology is grounded in an analysis  of
the linguistic act of stating, which is exclusive of  humans,  and  is  then
adapted to the case of animals, which are non-linguistic  creatures  and  do
not make statements. This is like saying  that  knowing  amounts  to  making
correct mental statements  (for  that  is  what  judgments  are),  but  that
nonetheless creatures that cannot make statements also  know  in  a  certain
sense--which sounds nonsensical, for it amounts to  saying  that  after  all
knowing may not amount to making correct mental statements. The only  reason
that Aristotle can get away with such  nonsense  is  that  he  conceives  of
truth as the adequation of the mind to the  object,  which  in  one  way  or
another involves a conception of knowledge as intentional resemblance.  Now,
since he cannot reasonably deny that to animlas, for he finds  it  in  human
perception, and since there can be no truth without knowledge, for truth  is
a property of an act of  knowing,  he  cannot  deny  knowledge  to  animals,
although he has, on the other hand, made  of  knowledge  a  property  of  an
intellectual act. In short,  Aristotle  seems  to  have  two  different  and
incompatible views of knowledge and of  truth.  Knowledge  consists  in  the
adequation of the mind to reality. For this, no knowledge  of  knowledge  is
required, that is, no knowledge of the truth of the adequation is  required.
On the other hand, knowledge is really a property of an intellectual act  of
judgment which cannot be without knowing that  the  intellectual  conception
is adequate to reality,  so  that  what  is  assented  to  and  affirmed  is
precisely this adequation.
Other complications in Aristotles' epistemology
        The    situation    concerning    Aristotle's    eopistemology--and,
derivatively, the medievals'--is, however,  even  more  complicated.  Martha
Nussbaum suggests that  the  medievals  mistook  Aristotle's  views  on  the
communication of already  acquired  knowledge  in  the  Posterior  Analytics
(that is, his views on teaching what  is  already  known,  what  is  already
mentally  stated)  for  his  views  on  heuristic  knowledge,  knowledge  as
discovery (that is, coming to know), which are different. The  former  would
amount to 'scientific knowledge,' which is ideally demonstrative and  refers
to statements, while the latter would  represent  Aristotle's  more  modest,
less foundationalist, more experimental, more  inductive--and  all  in  all,
genuinely Aristotelian epistemology. Be this as it may, it seems  that  Aris
has one view of knowledge built on an analysis  of  written  statements  and
their ideal conditions of truth, and another built on  an  analysis  of  the
intellectual act of judging by contrast to the sensitive act of  perceiving.
In neither of this cases, however, is there an intrinsic connection  between
knowing and acting, and in both is knowing  intrinsically  independent  from
affection, that is, from desiring or averting. Yet Aris has a third view  of
knowledge, both  human  and  animal.  This  is  practical  knowledge,  which
involves the just mentioned characteristics, and in which  either  there  is
no notion of truth, or  the  implicit  notion  of  truth--and  therefore  of
knowledge--cannot be the adequation of  the  mind  as  a  merely  resembling
faculty  to  reality-as-something-to-be  known-by-being-resembled-to.   This
third view of knowledge comes, in connection with animal  knoweldge,  in  De
Motu Animalium, and in the NE under the name of practical knowledge  and  in
connection  with  the  practical  syllogism.  Here  the  difference  between
animals and people lies not in the capacity to judge in the sense of  making
predications, which is the case  of  statements,  but  in  the  capacity  to
respond to the real as object of desire  or  aversion:  the  distinction  is
that animals are given by nature  their  objects,  and  only  learn  through
experience of success and failure ways of  attaining  them,  whereas  people
deliberate and, within limits, choose their objects of desire  or  aversion.
Here there is no truth in terms  of  adequation,  since  nothing  resemblant
intervenes or is affirmed or denied. There only is Prudentia, the  practical
decisions of the prudens, the decisions that  are  successful  in  terms  of
either realizing the best possible character given the circumstances, or  of
actually achieving the happiness that is
accessible  to  humans  given  the  interference  of  luck,  or   of   both.
Reconnecting with statements and narratives
      I began by suggesting  that,  because  they  bought  the  Aristotelian
intellectualistic epistemology  of  (scientific)  judgments-statements,  the
medievals were constrained to read the Bible as a collection  of  statements
rather  than  as  a  narrative,  and  to  consider  such  reading  de   iure
compulsory, at least as the foundational reading, since the  Bible  conveyed
God's true revelation, that is, divine statements.*
*  Notice  that  the  medievals  'bought'  the   Aristotelian   epistemology
applicatively, at least in their conduct as  intellectuals,  though  not  in
their practical conduct as Christians, for they continued  to  hear  (rather
than read) the Bible  as  a  narrative  uin  which  they  were  involved  on
Sundays.  They  couldn't  help  applying  it  to  the  Bible  in  their  own
theological  reading  of  the  Bible.  When,   however,   the   Aristotelian
epistemology conflicted with their faith (for  instance,  concerning  divine
authority rather than just evidence as a legitimate basis for assent),  they
modified the Aristotelian  epistemology.  Incidentally,  this  move  allowed
them to avoid the pressing problem of the historical facts  of  their  faith
by ignoring their storical character and simply reducing them  to  facts  as
mere objects of assent on the basis of  the  divine  authority  of  the  One
revealing such facts.
      "Buying," then, that is, coming to assent to and from then  on  taking
for granted, proceeding on the alreay justified assumption that...,  is  not
a matter of having a picture in the mind, but of  grasping  practically,  of
being disposed to respond, to treat as, for whether recognized or not  there
is a connection between knowing and  acting.  In  this  case,  however,  the
object  is  a  text,  as  is  the  intellectuals'  wont,  for  intellectuals
interested in truth operate reflectively and thus, as such,  deal  in  words
or thoughts rather than in deeds. Now, the only way to deal  with  words  is
to interpret them as words, which does not demand an agent's response.  This
is why Marx grudged the intellectuals for interpreting whe world (as  if  it
were a text), when the point is to change it through  action,  that  is,  to
respond to it.
      I proceeded, however, to show that naratives are not  statements,  and
that treating them as statements--which is what the  medievals  did  in  the
case of the Bible--badly misses the point.
Frei would  say,  read  the  Bible  as  a  narrative  (be  it  imaginary  or
historical), if you do not want to miss the point. How can you be in awe  of
Yaweh as a character if you do not see his relationship  with  Abraham  till
the moment He commanded him to sacrifice Isaac?
THis order was a moment in a developping  narrative  from  which  characters
emerge, and it was not a statement but an order. Furthermore, this event  is
not  narrated  in  the  Bible  as  object  for  assent,  but  to  provoke  a
relationship between the reader as possessed of sacred terror and  Yaweh  as
awesome.

