---
title: "96-DEC-4"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1996/96-DEC-4.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


\wp\96\96-dec-4
          On MacIntyre, Rationality, and Dramatic Space
            by Xavier 0. Monasterio
            University of Dayton
      The central issue in this paper is rationality, that is, the set of
implicit or explicit rules that are taken as normative concerning our
knowledge of, and dealings with, the world around us. Whether we realize it
or not, however, any such set implies as its correlate a particular
conception of the relationship in which the subject stands to the world.
Though what I want to do here can hardly make sense if it is presented in
isolation from the analysis by which it will be supported, it can be put
abstractly as an attempt to substitute the conception of our relationship
to the world implied by the currently prevailing notion of rationality for
another conception that seems to me to be the appropriate one.
      To enlighten the reader a bit more concerning the scope of this
paper, I will mention two distinguished books in the current philosophical
literature. Both of them have a bearing on the central issue, and with both
of them, though in significantly different ways, I find myself in deep
sympathy. The first is Rorty's devastating attack on the sort of philosophy
that results from taking for granted that the knower is an ethereal mind
whose function consists in mirroring the world.  While I find Rorty's own
stance very confusing and of little value, I am in total agreement with him
as to what he rejects. The second book is MacIntyre's After virtue. For
reasons that this paper will attempt to make clear and persuasive,
MacIntyre's work seems to me to constitute an important, positive step in
the right direction.
      In Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature Rorty MOUNTED a
devastating attack on the hopeless sort of philosophy that results from
attributing the primacy to epistemology, which inescapably leads to the
invention of the epistemic subject--an ethereal mind whose function
consists in mirroring reality, from  which it follows that knowledge cannot
be but the image of the real in the mirror.
But is there any other kind of philosophy, and doesn't Rorty's criticism
apply not only to post-Cartesian philosophy after Descartes but to all
philosophy?

 unless we are to fall into mere equivocation by naming "philosophy" the
kind of activity pursued by Rorty after Philosophy and the Mirror of
Nature, which has nothing to do with
An historical excursion
      Chapter 3 of Descartes' Discourse on Method starts as follows:
      In the same way as it is not sufficient, before beginning to rebuild
      the house in which one lives, only to pull it down and to provide
      material and architects, or oneself to try one's hand at architecture,
      and moreover, to have drawn the plan carefully, but one must also
      provide oneself with some other accommodation in which to be lodged
      conveniently while the work is going on, so, also, in order that I
      might not remain irresolute in my actions during the time that my
      reason would oblige me to be so in my judgements, and so that I would
      not cease to live from that time forward as happily as I could, I
      formed a provisional moral code which consisted of only three or four
      maxims, which I am willing to disclose.
      This passage has intrigued me for a long time. Thee you have the good
Descartes preparing himself for the philosophical adventure of his life. He
wants to rebuild everything from scratch on a rational basis. He does not
know anything, for whatever he has known so far has to present its
credentials of truth-reality before the tribunal of the pure thinker.
Nonetheless, Descartes realizes that he has to go on with the risky
business of living while he does his thinking. And, therefore, in order not
to be completely lost in the business of living while he thinks, he takes
the precaution to build himself a provisory code for living in the
meantime. Whence does this strange realization of Descartes' come? Why does
not the business of living ask for the approval of the pure thinker before
starting, and apparently goes on whether the thinker considers it
rationally justified or not? Could it not be, after all, that the real
adventure is in the business of living, and that a philosophical adventure
a la Descartes is just a little game based on a reversal of the correct
perspective?
      The second historical figure I want to visit with is Hume. In Essay
IV of An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding he writes as follows in
support of his argument against causality:
      Let the Course of Things be allow'd hitherto ever so regular; that
      alone, without some new Argument or Inference, proves not, that, for
      the future, it will continue so. In vain do you pretend to have learnt
      the Nature of Bodies from your past Experience. Their secret Nature,
      and consequently, all their Effects and Influence may change, without
      any Change in their sensible Qualities. This happens sometimes, and
      with regard to some Objects: Why may it not happen always, and with
      Regard to all Objects? What Logic, what Process of Argument secures
      you against this Supposition? My practice, you say, refutes my Doubts.
      But you mistake the Purport of my Question. As an Agent, I am quite
      satisfy'd in the Point: But as a Philosopher, who has some Share of
      Curiosity, I will not say Scepticism, I want to learn the Foundation
      of this Inference.

      Here we have again, under a different form, the same radical
separation between the business of living and the philosophical stance. As
an agent involved in the business of living Hume is satisfied. But as a
philosopher, who has some share of curiosity, he is skeptical. Until and
unless the curious thinker can check the credentials of truth-reality of
the objects of his examination, scepticism is in order. In the meantime, of
course, he will go on living as if, like Descartes. What is this living as
if? Does one live more or less because one lives as if? Who, and on what
basis, decides that the rational way is for the living agent to present his
credentials to the pure thinker rather than the other way around?
      There is something awry here. One cannot help feeling that somehow
the cart is being put before the horse. It is as if, for some strange
reason, a person placed before a mirror had completely lost his sense of
orientation and wondered why his image is staring at him, and why he has to
move at the same time and in exactly the same way as he does.
      But what exactly is wrong? As a way to deal with this question it may
prove useful to analyze Husserl's phemomenological approach.
In the beginning was the epoché
       In his Cartesian Meditations Husserl specified what he saw as the
great advantage of his approach over Descartes'. The latter discarded
whatever he he could doubt. As for Husserl, he does not want to discard
anything of what appears, for that would amount to impoverishing the very
experiential world to be investigated. Thus, he does not doubt; he
brackets. The epoché is Husserl's move to situate the experientially given
in what he deems to be its proper philosophical place, that is, as merely
present, while preserving it for philosophical exploration in its entirety.
      This move, however, presupposes that the subject's conviction of the
existence of what is experientially present, or the absence thereof, do not
modify intrinsically what is lived. In other words, the object reduced to
existentially neutral appearance is in Husserl's assumption the same object
experientially encountered by people in what he calls "the natural
attitude."
      Phenomenology stands or falls with this presupposition. For if the
epoché entails an intrinsic modification of what is experienced, then the
philosopher who practices the epoché does not go back to the things
themselves as given in experience and, as a consequence, all he says about
them is irrelevant, for it is not about them. In other words, if the epoché
involves an intrinsic modification of what is lived, then the exploration
of the lived world under the epoché, that is, the phenomenological
exploration Husserl attempts, is a contresense. For my part, I am convinced
that such indeed is the case, and intend to show why, not for the sake of
refuting Husserl--a negative job that does not attract me--but rather as a
convenient strategy to come to grips with the subject of my paper.
Phenomenal presence and existential presence
      The notion of presence is absolutely central in Husserl's works. His
motto of going "back to the things themselves" expresses his decision to
return to what is actually present, to the things in their own evidential
givenness. The reason why, as a philosopher, Husserl despises the natural
attitude is because it goes beyond what is actually present. In that
attitude we are committed to the existence of what is present, naturally,
that is, spontaneously, but blindly, that is, without presential support.
Hence the need for the epoché, which neutralizes this blind commitment
while leaving intact what is given in presence.
      Whoever is familiar with the Husserl of Ideen remembers his
fastidious and ferociously tedious analyses of what is actually present in
the perceptual mode. Husserl holds a sheet of paper in his hands. But does
he really perceive a sheet of paper or, rather, just a white surface? And
does he really perceive a quadrangular surface or, rather, a surface of a
different shape? It is worthy of attention that in all these analyses
Husserl is infinitely attentive to what is present to him but has not one
word to say of his own presence to what is present to him. In this, it
seems to me, he follows a long philosophical tradition, inaugurated by
Plato and footnoted, in more recent times by Descartes, Hume, and Kant--to
name only a few of its most distinguished members. In any case, as far as
Husserl is concerned, I want to claim that he works within a philosophical
paradigm characterized by a distorted notion of presence--a unidirectional
presence that has nothing to do with the presence we live in the perceptual
encounter.
      Let us start with Husserl's notion of presence. That which is
intentionally present to a subject is, in Husserl's Kantian parlance, a
phenomenon. Now, this phenomenal presence is, by definition,
unidirectional, exclusively oriented toward the subject. It is presence of
object to subject, of what appears to whom it appears. There is no presence
of subject to object, only the other way around, so much so that "subject"
and "object" or "phenomenon" are correlates reciprocally defined by this
unidirectional relationship. Such, according to Husserl, is the actual mode
of presence involved in our lived experience. But is he right?
      In ordinary language, the words "spectator," "witness," and
"participant" are not synonyms. What distinguishes them is that they name
three different modalities of presence. The difference among them, however,
cannot be analyzed in terms of the Husserlian notion of presence--mere
presence of object to subject--for part at least of what distinguishes the
spectator, the witness, and the participant lies, not in what is present to
them, but in their own presence to what is present to them.
      Consider, first, the spectator's case. I am watching a performance of
Hamlet. The prince is telling the sweet Ophelia to get herself into a
nunnery. I, the spectator, feel like telling Hamlet that he is abusing the
poor child, that Ophelia deserves better than his brutal tirade on the
bestiality of the human male. The trouble is that my words cannot attain
Hamlet--not even if I shouted them, as children do sometimes in the movies
to forewarn their hero that the bad guy is about to attack him from the
back. If I shouted, the actor would hear me, but Hamlet would not. For what
is happening before my eyes does not happen in the geographical location of
the stage, but in an imaginary space to which I have access only as a
spectator. The world in which Hamlet and Ophelia live is, in relation to
me, transcendent. I cannot enter it, I do not belong within the space in
which the action takes place. Nothing can happen to me, the spectator,
within the space of the spectacle, but neither can I interfere with what
happens within that space. Hamlet can
insult Ophelia, but he cannot insult me. He can be murdered by his uncle,
but not by me. This is to say that the spectator is defined by his own mode
of presence to the spectacle. And, his mode of presence is, by comparison
to the forms of presence which we will now analyze, a sort of absence, in
that he is out of the reach of what happens, and what happens is equally
out of his reach.
      Obviously, our ordinary relationship to what we perceive is not the
spectator's. Our world is not just in front of us, like the spectacle, but
around us. Neither is what we perceive transcendent in respect of us, nor
are we transcendent in respect of it. What happens within the perceptual
space in whose midst we find ourselves may--and sometimes does--happen to
us, depending on whether we are functioning as witnesses or as
participants. Sometimes, indeed, we function merely as witnesses. While
strolling in the street, for instance, I may witness an accident. A cyclist
is hit by a car. I myself am not involved in the event in any way. What
happens in this case within my perceptual space does not happen to me. I am
neither the cyclist nor the driver of the car. What happens to them. I am
only a witness of what happens.
      At first sight, the relationship between the witness and what he
witnesses seems to be the same as that between the spectator and the
spectacle. In fact, it is not. For the distinction between the world in
which the spectator lives and the world in which Hamlet lives is radical
and the distance between them unbridgeable. The spectator who would jump on
the stage to stop Hamlet in the middle of his tirade to Ophelia would not
only make a fool of himself, he would be a fool, for there is no Hamlet
within his reach. The witness, on the other hand, is himself within the
space in which what he witnesses takes place. He is always a potential
participant, potentially within the reach of what he witnesses, having what
he witnesses within his potential reach. For this very reason the
distinction between witness and participant is always fluid. I may be
called to help extract the poor cyclist from under the car that hit him, or
get involved in preventing the driver from leaving the place of the
accident before the police arrive. From being a witness I have become a
participant. Now I am part and parcel of the event. What happens now
happens to me, and I myself contribute to shape what happens.
      We may summarize. The spectator lives in respect of the spectacle
'out of reach,' essentially; the witness, potentially 'within reach' and,
thus, only incidentally 'out of reach;' the participant, finally, lives
within actual reach, himself involved in what takes place, part and parcel
of the event as shaper of it and shaped by it.
      Under the light of the preceding analysis the epoché starts showing
itself for what it is, namely, a move by which the subject qua philosopher
neutralizes his own presence to the world he wants to explore and removes
himself thereby to an utterly transcendental no man's land. Unsurprisingly,
this distortion of his actual relationship to the world entails a profound
modification of the world itself. Instead of finding himself in the active
interchange in which we live with what surrounds us and within whose reach
we are in the perceptual encounter, the philosopher finds himself, as
philosopher, confronted with an array of objects whose only relationship to
him is that of a purely intentional presence. What Husserl calls "the
phenomenal" and explores tenaciously in his writings is nothing else than
the intentional correlate of a subject who is beyond the reach of what is
present to him, that is, of a transcendental subject to whom nothing can
happen and who, like Odysseus before the Sirens, cannot hear the call to
shape what happens. Needless to say, the total absence of the Husserlian
philosopher from the world to be explored differs abysmally from our
existential presence in the world in which we act.
Existentential presence and dramatic space
      Perceiving, then, is not, as Husserl assumes, being confronted by
phenomena. It is experiencing that which is within our reach and within
whose reach we ourselves are. It has the doublesidedness of an encounter,
not the safe onesidedness of a pure observation by a transcendental
subject. Now, the fact that the perceiving subject belongs himself within
the space of the perceived, within its reach, as exposed to the perceived
as the perceived is to him, makes our perceptual space into an essentially
dramatic one. I turn now to the exploration of this fundamental
characteristic of the lived world.
      Once the world is phenomenalized through the epoché, there is no
place left for the qualitative differences of experience which we express
through the names "spectator," "witness," and "participant." But,
furthermore, as the subject's existential relationship to the object is
neutralized, a consequent transformation of his perceptual field takes
place, by which the objects themselves lose their existential significance.
An apple falling from a tree, Hamlet talking to Ophelia on the stage, a
piece of paper, someone pointing his gun at me-all these become, or should
become, qualitatively similar experiences, since in all these cases the
object is supposedly characterized by the same mode of presence to the
subject. I wish to God that the man pointing his gun at me had exactly the
same mode of presence as Hamlet talking to Ophelia before my eyes and were
as unthreatening as a piece of paper on my desk! That may seem so to an
epocheic observer, who by the same token must find my different conducts in
the theater, in my office, and in the street utterly unintelligible.
Something is amiss in a bracketed world. What is it? The dramatic charge by
which the objects we encounter acquire their proper existential
significance, and without which
they become as dead and unintelligible as certain relics of an ancient
culture in a museum for the layman. For the space in which we live,
precisely because we live within it, is dramatic through and through. As
the Euclidean space is such that only a certain type of geometric figures
can find a place in it, so the only figures that can be inscribed in the
space of the world in which we live are dramatic figures. I find this idea
particularly difficult to convey, but perhaps it can be brought gradually
into focus, starting by allusion and trusting the reader's own familiarity
with our world.
      Let me then, begin with a concrete, though imaginary, instance.
Suppose that Husserl is conducting his phenomenological investigations in
his own garden. The world before him is in parentheses. All of a sudden he
realizes that his house has taken fire, where his wife (whether phenomenal
or not, the only one he has) is asleep. If Husserl insists on keeping the
world in parentheses instead of giving in to the furious but despicable
clamor of the natural attitude, he might as well continue his exploration
of the lived world based on the case at hand. After all, what else is there
to do about a phenomenon but to explore it phenomenologically? Now, it
would be unfair to Husserl to say that he would do that, for he never
claimed that anyone, himself included, could remain constantly in the
unnatural atattitude--still less than anyone should, for there is, and
there can be, no place for "shoulds" and "should nots" in the Husserlian
paradigm. All I want to say is that, under these circumstances, Husserl's
experience would undergo a total transformation. From being a-dramatic it
would become dramatic. The objects around Husserl would gain the
existential significance
characteristic of that which affects us and demands not only our curious
atattention but also our practical response. In other words, Husserl would
have been recalled from his transcendental limbo and would find himself
back, willy-nilly, in the world in which we never cease living, whose space
is characteristically dramatic.
      We might get a better grip on this elusive notion by means of a
contrast between two literary forms, namely, description and narration. For
it seems to me that the structural difference between them is precisely a
difference between a dramatic and an a-dramatic space.
      One cannot reduce the difference between a description and a
narration to a difference in the author's intentions. If that were the
case, one would be able to describe or narrate at will. Well, I challenge
the reader to narrate a door. On the other hand, he won't have any trouble
describing a door. Obviously, then, the respective structures of
description and narration are not totally independent of the identity of
their respective objects.
      One may, then, feel tempted to say that the difference is that the
object of description is something static, while that of narration is
something dynamic. This comes closer to the point, for the object of a
narration is always dynamic indeed, namely, an event. However, this
distinction will be insufficient unless we specify further the particular
sort of events which are narratable, for not all events are. Take, for
instance, the process of division of a cell, or the eruption of Mount St.
Helen. Those are events. Yet, they can be described. The reason is--and
here we arrive at the core in our search--that the object of narration has
to be a dramatic event, while the object of description, be it static (as a
table) or dynamic (as the eruption of a volcano) is a-dramatic.
      But what makes an event dramatic? Let us see. Indisputably, the novel
belongs in the narrative genre. Why is a novel narrative rather than just
descriptive? To answer this question it will be useful to realize that one
cannot possibly write a novel in which the characters are things. If you
don't believe this, try, for instance, to write a novel about typewriters,
bookshelves, and desks--assuming, of course, that you do not 'personalize'
them. It is not just that it would be a very dull novel, whatever the
number of events you may introduce. It simply won't be a novel at all. It
will be a mere series of descriptions and a terribly dull book. And it will
be terribly dull and not a novel at all because it lacks something
essential to the novel, namely, a dramatic space.
      How is the dramatic space of the novel opened? As I observed above,
the eruption of Mount St. Helen can be described. The reason is that, by
itself, that event is a-dramatic. However it becomes dramatic, and
unavoidably so, as soon as the eruption happens to someone. Indeed, you
have only to introduce into your description of the eruption someone who
finds himself threatened by the event, and, whether you like it or not,
your description ceases being a description. It becomes dramatic and, by
the same token, it becomes a narration. Thus, what distinguishes a
narration from a description is that the former is dramatic, while the
latter is a-dramatic. And a narration is dramatic in virtue of the identity
of its object, which is not just an event or a series of events, but an
event or a series of events lived by someone who is affected by them. Since
things are not affected by the events of which they are part, since what
happens does not happen to them in the sense in which what happens happens
to us--participants who are affected by what happens--it is impossible to
write a novel about things. To do that, one would have to personalize those
things, that is, to make them capable of living dramatically-and then they
would not be things anymore. Thus the novelist does not need to decide to
open a dramatic space, which is the space characteristic of the novel. The
space of the novel is irremediably dramatic because it is populated by
beings who are affected by the events in which they participate and who
grasp the significance of those events. And if novels as well as plays
convey automatically, in spite of their imaginary character, a flavor of
reality to the reader or the spectator, it is because they preserve the
dramatic structure of the space in which the reader or the spectator
actually live. The depth of our human space is not the neutral, aseptic
depth of Newtonian Kantian space. It is the depth of a drama--which does
not mean that the drama is necessarily or constantly a tragedy. The day
Robinson Crusoe saw the trace of a human foot on the shores of his island
his whole life was joyfully redefined because his dramatic space was
restructured by an event in which he himself was involved and, as a
linguistic agent, he grasped its significance. For an epocheic observer
Robinson's change after that experience has to remain unintelligible. We,
however, the poor people who live in the only attitude that is natural to
the dramatic agent, have no trouble relating to it.
Rationality and the contemplative perspective
      It is time to return to our starting point. We began with Descartes
and Hume. In their radical separation of the thinker from the agent and
their unhesitating self-identification as philosophers that is, as rational
beings, with the former we sensed something awry. In order to detect
precisely what was wrong with them we moved to Husserl. The advantage of
Husserl is that thanks to his explicit and systematic use of the epoché as
the essential philosophical tool he renders easily accessible to analysis
the sort of relationship between subject and world tacitly presupposed by
Descartes and Hume.
      The purpose of my analysis of the participant was to show, by means
of a contrast with the subject of the Cartesian tradition, to which Husserl
belongs, how little justice the unidirectional model of presence which
defines that tradition does to the richness of the experiential encounter.
The participant--and such happens to be, whether we like it or not, our
situation--finds himself in a dramatic space of which, for obvious reasons,
we find no inkling in Descartes, in Hume, or in Husserl.
      It is important to realize, however, that far from constituting the
exception in the history of philosophy, Descartes, Hume, and Husserl are
themselves typical representatives of a tradition that goes back to Plato.
For it was Plato, indeed, who gave shape to the idea of knowledge as
accurate contemplation of reality and made, therefore, normative for the
rational subject to attempt to transcend the world by cutting his ties to
it. Securely distanced from the action by the chains that tied him to his
seat in the  cavern, Plato could not fathom why anyone could take seriously
what, for all its vividness, he as a pure contemplator had every reason to
identify as mere appearances. Disgusted with shadows, Plato turned his eyes
away from the cavern toward the light in search of genuine realities, that
is, of objects capable of living up to the "rational" demands of a pure
contemplator.
      That Plato's approach, based as it is on a distortion of the
fundamental subject-world relationship, may have become the normative model
of rationality and come to give authoritative shape to our notions of
experience, of evidence, of values, of objectivity, of knowledge, and of
truth, is almost beyond comprehension. For the fact is that Platonism is as
alive today as it has ever been, and that philosophers continue to be the
official carriers of that tradition. It is true that Plato is seldom
followed in his search for eternal Ideas. But that is not what
characterizes Platonism. The theory of the Ideas is only Plato's personal
contribution to the series of bad solutions to the impossible problem with
which all those are unavoidably faced who conceive the subject-object
relationship the way Plato did. What characterizes Platonism is the
neutralization by the thinker of his own exposure to
the surrounding world. It is in this sense that most of what goes on today
under the name of philosophy continues to be a series of footnotes to
Plato, a futile search for an impossible accurate representation of
reality, as amply demonstrated by Rorty's shattering criticism of the
prevailing philosophical model.
      But one does not need to be familiar with Philosophy and the Mirror
of Nature to realize that such is the case. What do most philosophers deal
with today? Pictures, though they call them by the more respectable name of
"descriptions." For some, the issue is still justifying the picture they
happen to prefer-most often the latest description of the world that they
can glean from "the hard sciences"-though they themselves know that such a
justification would have to be based on a neutrally descriptive language
that is impossible. As for others, tired of finding only shadows-shadows of
bodies,
shadows of values, and the shadow of the very self who finds those
