---
title: "96-NOV-1-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1996/96-NOV-1-1"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v2.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

NARRATIVE

Statement of the problem and Objective of the study

Until approximately the beginning of the Fifties American Catholic colleges had no problem of identity.  I submit that the reason was that they possessed in Aquinas's so-called "synthesis of faith and reason" a definite ideological basis for their distinction from secular institutions of higher learning.  A clear, significant distinction between Catholic colleges and their secular counterparts lay in the role that philosophy played in their curriculum.  In the first place, in Catholic colleges students were obligatorily submitted to a heavy dose of courses in philosophy, which was not the case in other colleges.  Secondly, the particular philosophy the students were exposed to and came to see as substantially true was Thomism, or the adaptation of Aquinas's philosophy to modern times which was known by the name of Neo-Thomism.  Needless to say, such was not was not at all the case in non-Catholic colleges.

Why was philosophy rather than theology the backbone of the Catholic identity of our universities? To understand this we have to refer ourselves to Aquinas's synthesis of faith and reason,  and to the functions that philosophy and theology are called to perform according to it.  

Was the Thomism studied in Catholic universities a Catholic philosophy? On this point there was a perpetual ambiguity among Catholic intellectuals.  However, according to Aquinas's view, the answer was unambiguous: no philosophy could be Catholic, since philosophy worked exclusively within the domain of knowledge accessible to reason left to its own devices, independently of divine revelation.  A philosophy, therefore--and this applied as well to the Thomism studied in Catholic colleges--could be true or false, but it could not be Catholic or non-Catholic.  Now, since Catholics were convinced that Thomism was the substantially true

philosophy, they saw it as the philosophy potentially called to rally the agreement of all those who pursued the truth rationally and with an open mind, regardless of their religious commitments.  Hence, being in possession of the true philosophy, Catholic colleges could confidently follow their own way, waiting till their secular counterparts came to see the light and rejoined them.

This explains why Catholic colleges, as institutions of learning rather than of proselytizing, staked their identity on philosophy rather than on theology.  Indeed, the latter, in Aquinas's view, presupposes and demands the adherence to divine revelation as understood in the Catholic tradition, whereas philosophy is by its very nature purely rational.        

Alas!, this ideological edifice had for all practical purposes collapsed by the end of the Sixties. As a result, Catholic universities found themselves without the ideological justification for their identity and, therefore, in a dire crisis of identity.

We are now in 1996, and the crisis continues. Why have Catholic colleges been so slow in overcoming their crisis of identity? A significant factor, in my estimation, is that we have not had the courage or the wisdom to face squarely the issue--whether the conception of faith and reason and of their relationship by which we were guided in the past was as valid as we had supposed, in which case we should return to our past, or whether the synthesis on which we so confidently relied was defective, in which case we should resolutely look somewhere else for a basis of the Catholic identity of our colleges.  Instead of doing that, we have remained in an impossible no man's land.  We continue to pay lip service to the Thomistic synthesis which guided us in the past, as if it were valid and capable of guiding us as we once thought, but in fact it has ceased to guide us.  Yes, we have kept departments of philosophy and of religious studies in our universities, but these departments are totally different from what they were before the crisis. They neither perform, nor can or want to perform the functions they performed in the past, which corresponded to Aquinas's conception of philosophy and theology.  In fact, the strong admonitions expressed in the ecclesiastical document Ex corde Ecclesiae , however much we may resent them, simply witness to the obvious fact that these departments are not performing the functions that correspond to their disciplines according to the Thomistic synthesis. For good or bad, the ecclesiastical document still takes the validity of the synthesis for granted, but our colleges have ceased to be inspired by it without actually rejecting it. Not a comfortable position to be in. Instead of an honest confrontation with our past we sometimes resort to magical ideas in which we ourselves do not quite believe. If only we could have at UD one or two distinguished specialists on medieval philosophy, or an endowed chair on Thomas Aquinas, or perhaps even an institute of Thomistic philosophical and theological studies, then our universities would miraculously be on their way to overcome their crisis of identity.

For my part, I am of the opinion that the only efficient way to begin solving our problem of identity--insofar as it depends on ideological factors, which of course are not the only ones, but are certainly important--is to submit to critical examination the Thomistic view of faith and reason and of their relationship, by reference to which we defined our Catholic identity as academic institutions in the past.

I have devoted much effort to the critical examination I am suggesting.  In my lecture on the subject "Is there a Catholic Intellectual Tradition?" I argued that the Thommistic synthesis of faith and reason never functioned as it was supposed to, and that it actually led to the conflict between faith and reason that took place at the time of the Enlightenment, whose result was the secularization of most European universities.  After the mentioned lecture I have continued reflecting on this issue, and I think I can go now a step farther and attempt to explain why the Thomistic synthesis of faith and reason failed. This is what I propose to work on.

 

Method of investigation

For the purposes of the research grant for which I am applying, which covers only the summer months, I intend to deal with the problem in a preliminary and limited way.  As a concrete approach, I want to take advantage of the indirect but significant clues left by Henri de Lubac, S.J., later Cardinal, on his celebrated book The Drama of Atheist Humanism .  In that work de Lubac undertook an analysis of modern atheism.  He saw in Nietzsche's position a radically new form of atheism, in that it does not consist in a doctrine that denies God's existence, but in what de Lubac calls "a way of life," which unlike a doctrine is not a matter of intellectual assent or dissent.  What is particularly interesting for my purposes is that to Nietzsche's atheism de Lubac does not oppose Aquinas's conception, according to which the object of faith is a revealed doctrine and the act of faith an act of intellectual assent based on God's authority. Rather he opposes to Nietzsche's atheism Kierkegaard's conception, according to which the Christian faith is itself a way of life in relation to God.  This is particularly interesting because, without making this point explicit and perhaps without being fully aware of it, de Lubac is suggesting by implication that Kierkegaard's understanding of the faith involved in Christianity, rather than Aquinas's, is the appropriate conception of faith.  My intention is to write an article in which I use the Kierkegaardian notion of faith as a definite point of contrast by reference to which the insufficiency of Aquinas interpretation of faith and reason can be rendered visible.  

I plan to follow two steps in my study:  

(1) The "rationalism" to which both Nietzsche and Kierkegaard are opposed--and rightly so, in de Lubac's estimation--corresponds, in my opinion, to the understanding of reason and of faith on which Aquinas' synthesis rests. If therefore, Nietzsche's and Kierkegaard's criticism of rationalism--to which de Lubac subscribes--is valid, it applies to Aquinas' synthesis.

(2) Both Nietzsche's and Kierkegaard's positions, though opposite to each other as atheism and faith are opposites, they instantiate nonetheless the existential space in which the issues of faith and non-faith are actually faced by people. It will be part of my task to articulate more clearly than de Lubac does that faith and atheism belong in the practical domain of deliberation, decision, and action rather than in the theoretical domain of sufficient reason and intellectual assent or dissent in which Aquinas placed them as a result of his Aristotelian epistemological framework.

It seems to me that, if successful, my project will begin pointing in a concrete way at the insufficiency of the notions of faith and of reason involved in Aquinas' celebrated synthesis.

Bibliography

One of the advantages of limiting my research in the way I have described is that the bibliography involved is also very limited.  I will of course be working on the basis of the knowledge of the most important Aquinas's works which I have gained in the past, and which I have studied in the original Latin. In addition to that, the only works to which I need to refer myself directly are de Lubac's The Drama of Atheist Humanism , and Kierkegaard's Philosophical Fragments and Unscientific Postscript to the Philosophical Fragments of Johannes Climacus .  With the latter, too, I am also quite familiar.  

Time schedule

For the article I have in mind, on whose subject I have

worked and meditated much, the summer months should suffice to complete it satisfactorily.

Anticipated publication outlet

By the nature of its subject, Catholic periodicals are more likely to be interested in my article. Two that come immediately to my mind are the American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly and International Philosophical Quarterly . Both of them have published pieces of mine in the past.

ABSTRACT

UNIVERSITY University of Dayton

PROJECT TITLE   Kierkegaard and Aquinas on Faith and Reason

INVESTIGATOR   Xavier O. Monasterio

DEPARTMENT Philosophy

DATE November 14, 1996

TYPE OF GRANT Catholic Intellectual Tradition Today

TOTAL RESEARCH

CHALLENGE SUPPORT  $3,000.00

RESEARCH FOCUS

The purpose of my research is to submit to critical scrutiny Aquinas's synthesis of faith and reason by reference to which Catholic colleges gained their identity in the past.  As an initial step toward the realization of this project, I intend to take advantage of the clues left by Henri de Lubac in his book The Drama of Atheist Humanism .  De Lubac does not mention Aquinas, nor does he explicitly criticize Aquinas's view of faith as intellectual assent to divinely revealed truths. But this silence is significant by itself. Indeed, de Lubac grants the legitimacy of Nietzsche's attacks against a rationalistic view of faith. And rather than seeing the alternative to Nietzsche's atheism in Aquinas's view, as one would expect such a distinguished Catholic theologian to do, de Lubac defends Kierkegaard's understanding of the type of faith involved in Christianity as the right alternative. I intend to extrapolate from de Lubac's position, which I share, to the issue of the validity of the Thomistic synthesis of faith and reason.

STRATEGIC NEEDS None
