---
title: "DRAFT-9"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/2005/DRAFT-9"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.0
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\chant\draft-9 October 6, 1993

Two types of theology

"And that... is why faith... must be a human act. Propositions abstracted from the will would leave our desires unaffected, our subjective ends apart from the objective final end that God has granted us, our actions therefore finally unintelligible, our lives surd and unredeemed. The propositions of faith on a page are so many pieces of paper, not identifiable as God's tender until we see them in use" (Eugene Ferdinand Rogers - See note 1).

Sartre attempts to retrieve the moment of direct experience, which he distinguishes from the moment of reflection which is cognitive. To be ashamed is not the same as knowing or stating that one is or was ashamed; it is an experienced way of being, not a predicative act. To pray God is not the same as to know that one prayed God. Reflective knowing is parasitic on doing; doing is selbstständig.

Reflective knowing, however, should not be confused with direct knowing, which is a moment of the action of the exposed agent and, thus, subordinated to action. Knowing is one of the doings or activities in which we engage in the moment of direct experience. To know God is not the same as to know reflectively that one knew God. What is the difference?

Direct knowing is toward the future. When as an agent I know that the cup is on the table, I know the cup instrumentally, in a hodological space in which I myself am situated as a vulnerable agent. When as an agent I know that somebody is downstairs in the middle of the night, I know this in a hodological space. Here there are distances of exposure of a needful purposeful agent . Because this agent's knowledge is instrumental, it is not objectifying; it transcends the known in view of the (future) goal, which in certain instances may be just to preserve the present state of affairs in order to enjoy it.

Knowledge is an answer to an implicit or an explicit question. We ask questions only when, for one reason or another, we do not know how to act, how to respond. ( Perhaps all question-asking on the agent's part may be reduced to what Aris calls "deliberation," and all knowledge in answer to questions may be reduced to what Aris calls "decision"  - See NE, VI). Whenever we ask questions, that is, whenever we question the environment or other people about particulars, our questions are questions of concern, questions of concerned, vulnerable agents, and the knowledge acquired through the answers is therefore practical, to be transcended applicatively in view of the goal. Knowing that somebody is downstairs is  not having a mental picture of somebody downstairs; it is visualizing, imagining as present and automatically transcending it actively toward the desired state of affairs by means of the action of calling the police. Thus perceiving (or knowing) is perceiving objects for response--good or bad, favorable or unfavorable--in a complex of instrumentality organized around a goal, and transcending them practically in our very response to them. Our knowledge is instrumental-applicative through and through . Knowing is transcending the known. Knowing habitually is being capable of transcending the known.

Because of its instrumental character, knowledge is never an end in itself, for by its very nature knowledge is destined to be transcended . Incidentally a person may pursue knowledge for the sake of the satisfaction of coming to know. However, as knowledge is meant to function as knowledge and thus to be transcended, it would be a mistake to consider as knowledge what satisfies the desire to know for the sake of knowing. THEN ONE EASILY FALLS INTO THE TRAP OF THE COPY THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE AND OF THE CONSEQUENT SEPARATION OF THEORY AND PRACTICE, OF FACTS AND VALUES.

The above applies to the 'knowledge' of faith, except that here perception, imaginary visualization and affection by object for response are in trust. For instance, faithing (that is, knowing in faith) that God is present in the Eucharist is transcended in my practical response to the God present in the Eucharist and, as a statement, it is abstracted from my response. Thus, it is not having a picture of God's presence in what I see as bread, much less of having a Leibnizian or scholastic explanation of God's Presence (an explanation that would have no applicative value). In fact, that God is present in the Eucharist is knowledge only insofar as it either actually functions or is capable of functioning as knowledge, that is, of informing human-action , so that, say, my genuflecting before the Eucharist is not like a blind reflex but an in-formed response to Jesus Christ present-- what the Scholastics called a human act rather than a mere action. ^(F1)

But how does one pass from not knowing that God is present in  the Eucharist to knowing? Ordinarily, in matters of faith, one does not pass; one is born within, or without. If one is born within the Catholic culture, one learns by doing, by imitating, and by hearing those who know what they do. If these knowledgeable agents refer to the Gospel's narrative--"This is my body"...--, there assent is not assent that terminates in mere vision of what is assented to, but practical disposition to genuflect before the Eucharist because of God's presence, that is, virtually informed human-action. Those who do not share this 'knowledge' are not so disposed. Our disagreement with other Christians is first of all difference in informed practice, for their practice is informed by the knowledge that the Eucharistic bread is just a locus of God's grace, of God's action, whereas ours... - Now, how is our disagreement to be dissolved? Certainly not by discussion but by a practical conversion of one or the other of us to a new practical gestalt, to a new practical seeing as, much as one moves to the realization that there is somebody downstairs.   

This is the way we Christian agents know God, as the teleological pole of the spatio-temporal instrumental complex we call history in the making--which is the desirous-knowledge that informs our Christian-human-action .

The above refers to knowledge from present to future which involves, or is identical with, decision . (The exposed agent knows toward the future, but from a past). But what about knowledge of the past, which does not involve decision? For there is such a thing as sedimented knowledge. "The cup was on the table" is not  relevant for my (or anybody's) future action anymore, but it was--and informed my (or somebody's) action--in the past. What about this knowledge of past facts which do not inform action anymore and, therefore, are not transcended? This knowledge does not seem to function as I said knowledge functioned, for it does not have to be transcended by the agent.

Yet it is not purely objective. It is past history , history sedimented in memory. It is what was transcended by an agent OR agents and the traces left by the actual outcome(s). Insofar as the memory is of the agent, it is his/her history, and has to be told narratively to keep open the future that was open for the agent, in order to be understood as it was lived . Insofar as the memory is of agents who in one way or another identify with that agent's past as their past which explains or renders intelligible their present goals, it is their history, too. Thus, I can tell the developments that led to my marriage: encounter, project, peripeteia, realization. And a "realistic narrative," to use Frei's expression, will be dramatic . And, if historical, traces are at least possible, inscribed in documents or in the world. My past explains or renders intelligible my present-future commitment to Gen. Thus, too, I can tell Jesus' history, which is my reading of it as the history of the teaching and the actions and the passion and the resurrection of the Son of God, which is my past and the past I share with many others, which renders intelligible our present-future commitment to Christ.  

The question of traces brings me to the world in a way that goes beyond the intentional. My actions leave traces whether or not I am aware of it or want them to leave traces, much as someone leaves traces in Robinson's island. In this sense and to this order I am passive, which is the other side of the coin of exposure. If the world is exposed to me for the realization of my projects, I am vulnerable to the world, too. Not only to other people's intentional actions, but to the world. This is the order of causality, to give it a name and distinguish it from  the order of intentionality.

Any one of my actions takes place in a given situation which limits my possible projects and constrains the means to achieve them, a situation which I cannot change by mere wish, only through action. And my action itself is constrained by the nature of my body and of the surrounding world.

I learn by practice--and by imitation and being told--a lot of my passivity as a body, which is learning the activity of the objects by which I am surrounded. But then, in order to gain further control on the objects by which I am surrounded, that is to increase their passivity to my activity independently of circumstances, I attempt to understand their nature. Here objectification takes place, which abstracts from circumstances and from distances to any subject .

Appendix: Aris on the ability to objectify .

\wp\chant\draft-9

AQUINAS COMMENTARY ON ARIS' A METAPHYSICORUM I, 1, i, 1-35

The following quotations from Aquinas' commentary on Aris' Metaphysicorum are interesting. Indeed, not only do they show a certain connection between theoretical and practical knowledge, between intellectus speculativus and practicus, for there is a certain continuity between animal and human knowledge, but also to what extent Aris was confused: ratio universalis belongs to speculative, scientific knowledge; ratio particularis to practical. However, in people, ratio particularis is real, objectified knowledge quia, to be completed by ratio universalies which is knowledge propter quid. It seems, therefore, that, ratio particularis falls on the side of practical (even animal) knowledge and belongs to object for response, whereas ratio universalis falls on the side of theoretical knowledge and belongs to object for contemplation. But the transition is possible thanks to a ratio particularis of object for response and of object for contemplation , as if they were the same!  

At least indirectly, Aris speaks of this human ability to objectify, in A Metaph, 1 , commented by Aquinas.

"Substantiis autem separatis, quae sunt principia intellectus humani, et ad quae intellectus humanus se habet ut imperfectum ad perfectum, non coniungitur homo nisi per intellectum: unde et in hoc ultima hominis felicitas consistit. Et ideo naturaliter homo desiderat scientiam . Nec obstat si aliqui homines scientiae huic studium non impendant... Hoc autem proponit Aris ut ostendat, quod quaerere scientiam non propter aliud utilem, qualis haec scientia, non est vanum, cum naturale desiderium vanum esse non possit" (4).

"Deinde ostendit quod proposuerat, per signum: quia cum sensus ad duo nobis deserviant, sc. ad cognitionem rerum, et ad utilitatem vitae ; diliguntur a nobis propter seipsos, inquantum cognoscitivi sunt, et etiam propter hoc, quod utilitatem ad viotam confeunt. Et hoc patet ex hoc, quod ille sensus maxime ab omnibus diligitur, qui magis cognoscitivus est, qui est visus , quem diligimus non solum ad agendum aliquid, sed etiam si nihil agere debemus" (5).

" Et primo quantum ad bruta animalia. Secundo quantum ad homines :

"Communicant autem omnia animalia in hoc quod naturaliter sensus habent. Nam ex hoc animal est animal, quod habet animam sensitivam... Quamvis autem omnia animalia sensus habeant naturaliter, non tamen omnia habent omnes sensus, sed solum perfecta. Omnia vero habent sensum tactus. Ipse enim est quodammodo fundamentum aliorum sensuum. Non autem habent omnia sensum visus, quia sensus visus est omnibus aliis perfectior in cognocendo, sed tactus magis nec nessarius . Est enim cognoscitivus eorum ex quibus animal constat, sc. calidi, figidi, humidi et sicci. Unde sicut visus inter omnes est perfectior in cognoscendo, ita tactus est magis necessarius" (9).

" Ponit diversitatem cognitionis quae est in brutis: et tangit etiam tres gradus cognitionis in huiusmodi animalibus . Quaedam enim sunt, quae licet sensum habeant, non habent memoriam, quae ex sensu fit. Memoria enim sequitur phantasiam, quae est motus facftus a sensu secundum actum, ut habetur in secundo de Anima . In quibusdam vero animalibus ex sensu non fit phantasia, et sic in eis non potest esse memoria; et huiusmodi sunt animalia imperfecta, quae sunt immobilia secundum locum ut conchilia. Cum enim animalibus cognitio sensitiva sit provisiva ad vitae necessitatem et ad propriam operationem , animalia illa memoriam habere debent, quae moventur ad distans motu porogressivo; nisi enim apud ea remaneret per memoriam intentio praeconcepta, ex qua ad motum inducuntur, motum continuare non possunt quousque finem intentum consequerentur" (10).

"Ex hoc autem, quod quaedam animalia memoriam habent et quaedam non habent, sequitur quod quaedam sunt prudentia, et quaedam non. Cum enim prudentia ex praeteritorum memoria de futuris provideat ... Dicitur autem prudentia aaiter in brutis animalibus, et aliter in hominibus esse . In hominibus quidem est prudentia secundum quod ex ratione deliberant quid eos oporteat agere; unde dicitur sexto Ethicorum , quod prudentia est recta ratio agibilium. Iudicium autem de rebus agendis non ex rationis deliberatione, sed ex quodam naturae instinctu, prudentia in aliis animalibus dicitur. Unde prudentia in aliis animalibus est naturalis aestimatio de convenientibus prosequendis, et fugiendis nocivis, sicut agnus sequitur matrem et fugit lupum" (11).

" Ostendit gradus cognitionis humanae... Ostendit quomodo humana cognitio excedit praedictorum cognitionem. Secundo, ostendit quodmodo humana cognitio per diversus gradus distribuatur .

"In hoc vero quod cognitionem animalium determinat per comparationem ad regimen vitae, datur intelligi quod cognitio inest ipsis animalibus non propter ipsum cognoscere, sed propter necessitatem actionis " (14).

"Supra memoriam autem in hominibus, ut infra dicetur, proximum est experimentum, quaod quaedam animalia non participant nisi parum. Expermimentum est enim ex collatione plurium singularium in memoria receptorum . Huiusmodi autem collatio est homini propria, et pertinet ad vim cogitativam, quae ratio particularis dicitur: quae est collativa intentionum individualium, sicut ratio uiniversalis intentionum universalium . Et quia ex multis sensibus et memoria animalia ad aliquid consuescunt prosequendum vel vitandum , inde est quod aliquid experimenti, licet parum, participare videntur. Homines autem supra experimentum, quod pertienet ad rationem particularem, habent rationem universalem, per quam vivunt, sicut per id quod est principale in eis " (15).

"Sicut autem se habet experimentum ad rationem particularem, et consuetudo ad memoriam in animalibus, ita se habet ars ad rationem universalem" (16).

"Dicit ergo primo, quod ex memoria in hominibus experimentum causatur. Modus autem causandi est iste: quia ex multis memoriis unius rei accipit homo experimentum de aliquo, quo experimento potens est ad facile et recte operandum . Et ideo quia potentiam recte et faciliter operandi praebet experimentum , videtur fere esse simile arti et scientiae. Est enim similitudo eo quod utrobique ex multis una acceptio alicujus rei sumitur . Dissimilitudo autem, quia per artem accipiuntur universalia, per experimentum singularia" (17).  

" Ex experientia in hominibus fit scientia et ars... experimmentum fit ex memoria . Nam sicut ex multis memoriis fit una experimentalis scientia, ita ex multis experimentis apprehensis fit universalis acceptio de omnibus similibus . Unde plus habet hoc ars quam experimentum: quia experimentum tantum circa singularia versatur" (18).

"... quantum ad actum pertinet, experientia nihil videtur differre ab arte. Cum enim ad actionem venitur, tollitur differentia quae inter experimentum et arte erat per universale et singulare: quia sicut experimentum circa singularia operatur, ita et ars; unde praedicta differentia erat in cognoscendo tantum . Sed quamvis in modo operandi ars et experimentum non differant, quia utraque circa singularia operatur, differunt tamen in efficacia operandi. Nam experti magis proficiunt in operando illis qui habent rationem universalem artis sine experimento " (20).

"Cujus causa est, quia actiones sunt circa singularia... Unde medicus non sanat hominem nisi per accidens, sed per se sanat Platonem aut Socrtem... (21).

"Unde cum ars sit universalium, experientia singularium , si aliquis habet rationem artis sine experientia, erit quidem perfectus in hoc quod universale cognoscat; sed quia ignorat singulare cum experimento careat, multoties in curando peccabit : quia curatio magis pertinet ad singulare quam ad universale, cum ad hoc pertineat per se, ad ilud per accidens" (22).  

" Comparat experimentum ad artem quantum ad cognitionem .... Proponit autem praeeminentiam artis... quantum ad obviare, quod in disputationibus accidit. Nam habens artem potest disputando obviare his quae contra artem dicuntur, non autem habens experimentum " (23).  

"Probat praedictam praeeminentiam [artis supra experimentum] tripliciter. Prima probatio talis est. Illi qui sciunt causam et propter quid, scientiores sunt et sapientiores illis qui ignorant causam, sed solum sciunt quia. Experti autem sciunt quia sed nesciunt propter quid. Artifices vero sciunt causam, et propter quid. " (24).

"... architectores sciunt causas factorum... architector dicitur quasi principalis artifex..." (26).

"... signum scientis est, quod possit docere, quod est scientiam in alio causare . Artifices autem docere possunt, quia cum causas cognoscant, ex eis possunt demonstrare * [ * DEMONSTRATIO IS SPECULATIVE KNOWLEDGE , FOR IT AIMS AT ASSENT, NOT AT ACTION. THIS SHOWS THE SENSE IN WHICH THE WORD "ARTIFICES" IS TO BE TAKEN ]: demonstratio autem est syllogismus faciens scire, ut dicitur primo Posteriorum . Experti autem non possunt docere, quia non possunt ad scientiam perducere, cum causam ignorent. Et si ea quae experimento congnoscunt aliis tradant, non recipient per modum scientiae, sed per modum opinionis vel credulitatis. Unde patet quod artifices sint magis sapientes et scientes expertis" (29).

"... nullum sensum dicimus sapientiam, scilicet propter hoc quod licet aliquis sensus cognoscat quia, tamen, non propter quid cognoscit. Tactus enim iudicat quod ignis calidus est, non tamen apprehendit propter quid; ergo experti qui habent singularium cognitionem causam ignorantes, sapientes dici non possunt " 30).

"Ergo scientiae aliquae sunt magis admirabiles et magis dignae nomine sapientiae propter eminentiorem sensum, et non propter utilitatem (31).

"Cum igitur plures artes sint repertae quantum ad utilitatem , quarum quaedamsunt ad vitae necessitatem , sicut mechanicae; quaedam vero ad introductionem in aliis scientiis , sicut scientiae logicales; illi artifices dicendi sunt speientiores, qwuorum scientiae non sunt ad utilitatem inventae, sed propter ipsum scire, cuiusmodi sunt scientiae speculativae (32) .

"Et quod [speculativae scientiae] non sunt propter huiusmodi [vel ad necessitatem vitae, vel ad voluptatem, sed propter seipsas repertae ] patet ex loco quo inventae sunt. In locis enim illis primo repertae sunt, ubi primo homines studuerunt circa talia. Alia littera habet, 'Et primum his locis ubi vacabant' id est ab aliis occupationibus quiescentes studio vacabant quasi necessariis abundantes. Unde et circa Aegyptum primo inventae sunt artes mathematicae, quae sunt maxime speculativae, a sacerdotibus, qui sunt concessi studio vacare, et de publico expensas habebant, sicut etiam legitur in Genesi" (33).

"Sed quia usus nomine artis fuerat et sapientiae et scientiae indifferenter, ne aliquis putet hae omnia esse nomina synonyma idem penitus significantia hanc opinionem removet, et remittit ad... sextum Ethicorum , ubi dictum est, in quo differant scientia et ars et sapientia et prudentia et intellectus. Et ut breviter dicatur, sapientia et scientia et intellectus sunt circa partem animae speculativam , quam ibi scientificum animae appellat. Differunt autem quia intellectus est habitus pprincipiorum primorum demonstrationis. Scientia vero est conclusionis ex causis inferioribus. Sapientia vero considerat causas primas. Unde ibidem dicitur caput scientiarum. Prudentia vero et ars est circa animae partem practicam, quae est raciocinative de contingentibus operabilibus a nobis . Et differunt: Nam prudentia dirigit in actionibus quae non transeunt ad exteriorem materiam, sed sunt perfectiones agentis: unde dicitur ibi quod prudentia est recta ratio agibilium. Ars vero dirigit in factionibus, quae in materiam exterioruem transeunt, sicut aedificare et secare: unde dicitur quod ars est recta ratio factibilium" (34).

Return to objectification

Whether or not Aris speaks of objectification, I want to deal with it. It is the attempt to understand natures abstracting from distances of exposure and circumstances.

Ex multis memoriis fit unum experimentum of object for response (ad aliquid prosequendum vel vitandum). This is valid both concerning higher animals and people. But the latter are linguistically gifted, which allows them to objectify--that is, name--the object as subject of objective predicates, as object for consideration even in absence, not just as object for response. This first objectification is what Aris calls ratio particularis, which he identifies with knowledge quia. Only in people, though, is there ratio , even ratio particularis. Animals have experimentum as practical expectation, but not as knowledge-quia, that is, as knowledge of a uniformity such as: "quia cum homo accipit in sua cognitione quod haec medicina contulit Socrati et Platoni tali infirmitate laborantibus, et multis aliis singularibus, quidquid sit illud, hoc ad experimentum pertinet; sed cum aliquis accipit, quod hoc omnibus conferat in tali specie aegritudinis determinata, et secundum talem complexionem, sicut quod contulit febricitantibus et phlegmaticis et cholericis, id iam ad artem pertinet" (19). The former knowledge, in its turn, makes possible the latter, for on the basis of the former people can ask the question why, that is,  search for the ratio universalis of the uniformity, the knowledge- propter quod.

According to Aris, however, the knowledge propter quod, the ratio universalis, is speculative, propter se, not instrumental. And so is even the knowledge quia insofar as it differs from the practical disposition of animals, resulting from repeated experience of exposure. But is he right? Or is his position just the result of his Platonic prejudice of the supremacy and the dignity of contemplative knowledge of the purely intelligible, of the substantiae separatae?

As Aris himself remarks, there is a certain continuity between the interested knowledge of animals and human knowledge, in that we too sometimes want to know not for the sake of knowing but for the sake of surviving. In addition, the knowledge propter quod is spontaneously transcended by the agent toward its practical application. Thus, if the virus of AIDS is discovered, the next step is finding the way of attacking it efficiently. It is clear, then, that the same piece of knowledge which is supposedly object of the speculative intellect is object of the practical intellect.

October 12

Reflective knowledge

So far I have spoken of direct, not reflective, knowledge.

But we have to be careful concerning this distinction. For I have spoken of knowledge of the agent immediately engaged in action--knowledge that seems to consist in deliberation and decision, which is therefore to be transcended in action--, and of knowledge of object for consideration, abstracting from circumstances and distances of exposure. Now, it may well be that need and desire carve the space within which this knowledge is possible, so that if we did not yearn for practical knowledge speculative knowledge would be impossible. The fact remains nonetheless that this knowledge is not directly subordinated to desire; it is not knowledge that moves. Rather, it is the other way around: the end cannot be chosen as an end (which would distinguish it from a mere wish) unless the means make it possible. As Aris says, one does not deliberate about what is possible but about what is to be done. To find out whether AIDS is produced by a virus is a matter of cold, calculative thinking. Our projects have, as Marx would say, material conditions, and one has to create the material conditions for their possibility as projects. I cannot deliberate whether or not to submit myself to the cure of AIDS if there is no such cure. But I can deliberate whether or not to look for a cure for aids which does not exist yet. And this depends on whether or not AIDS is caused by a virus. And this is totally independent from desire. So one can choose a presently unrealizable end, to make it realizable.

In certain cases, this unrealizable end becomes realizable by doing something (women's lib), in other cases by coming to know something (whether AIDS is caused by a virus).

That AIDS is produced by a virus may be known applicatively and, therefore, transcended by the one who desires the cure. But the knowledge itself is independent from desire. Does this not vindicate the Aristotelian distinction between intellectus speculativus et intellectus practicus?

There is no doubt that objectification takes place and, within its proper limits, that is, in the case of things by contrast to subjects, works. And that it is passive to object independently from desire. The problem is not there but in a theory that identifies the result of successful objectification with knowledge as a term, that identifies this knowledge either with reality itself or with a copy of reality, and that makes of the contemplation of such knowledge the ultimate telos of human life (for the Greeks this telos was justified on the basis of the superiority of the spiritual, eternal part of the human being) . There is a split between the subject's desires and the world's in-itselfness. Since we are passive to this in-itselfness and this in-itselfness is independent from desire, there is room for the speculative (contemplative, undesirous) functioning of the intellect--"functional thinking." Since, however, only subjects can properly function as telos-oi, as for the sake of which, ultimately the in-itselfness is subordinated to action for the sake of people who have other needs than knowing and are exposed to the world, not people subordinated to the contemplation of the in-itselfness in stupid beatific acceptance.

Knowledge of things and knowledge of people

I started the preceding section with a question: is objectification direct or reflective experience? On the one hand, direct experience is of objects for response and for the sake of responding to them. Insofar, however, as human action differs from animal action and is intelligent-intentional-human-act, the experience of object for response, which is always in particular circumstances, is deliberative and decisive, depending on personal goals and distances of exposure. Thus it has a desire and a knowledge component which results in action only when the two come together, that is, when the desired goal is known as realizable. Therefore, as far as action is concerned--and it seems that experiencing is not an end in itself but subservient to action--direct experiencing, as distinguishable from action, does not take place until the two components come together. As long as there is an unresolved question concerning the what experienced or the how to respond, experiencing has not taken place because knowledge and desire have not come together. Hence, the fact that in  certain cases there is thinking (functional or reflective) involved does not automatically mean that we are not at the moment of direct rather than reflective experience. This moment can be even less immediately connected to practice in the case of contemplative objectification, but, again, this does not automatically mean that we are not at the moment of direct rather than reflective experience.

But now we come to the case of knowledge-desire concerning other subjects, in which one can choose goals and transcend knowledge in terms of one's own good or other subject' good. Here is where ethics enters, concerning the choice of end-means, and I will not deal with it here. What interests me is whether the knowledge of oneself and other subjects that enters into direct experiencing is of the same kind as the knowledge of things.

On this issue, it seems, Sartre is of much use. My objectivity is given to me in my very experience of being exposed to the world and to others, which I attempt to reverse by being in control of them.

Reflective knowledge

Reflection is neither deliberation nor objectification in view of the future. It is a cognitive undertaking that attempts to determine the truth of (past) knowledge. This was the Greeks philosophical undertaking .  Of course this reflection functions from the present. And it is the deed of a pure contemplator who, therefore, has no desires and no goals.

We already saw that the knowledge of human past is history--not reflection--, which consists in probable reconstructions of past human undertakings or sufferings, where probability depends on coherence with living memories, written texts, and other traces. Human past is action-passion of exposed agents, not knowledge. This action-passion becomes known through history.

This reflection objectifies. But what is subjective in human acts, such as desire, cannot be objectified without falsification (except narratively).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

^(F1) "In the very first article of the Secunda Thomas makes that distinction when he contrasts the action of a human being with a human act. An ACTION of a human being is just a movement (extension) abstracted from a reason (intention), and therefore not an ACT properly so called, but a surd jerk Wittgenstein distinguishes famously between a wink and a twitch. The movement of the eyelid is unintelligible without an intention. Counterfeit and model language is just another kind of counterfeit or mode,l currency. The propositions, like the bills, may go either way. It is the intention, not the extension, the act, not the action,. that makes the difference, that makes the intelligibility. Thomas distinguishes a HUMAN ACT ("ACTUS"), which is voluntary , from the ACTION ("ACTIO"). The distinction is usually relative. An ACT is defined in terms of instantiating human freedom, which is habitual. An ACTION is defined in terms of the movement of a human being . Most actions can also bear description as acts. When St. Gaudens engraves, we may describe either the action or the act. Some movements, like twitches, do not, however, seem to bear intentional description, and seem to count as actions and not accts. Thomas seems to assimilate the instinctual behavior of animals more to action than to act. of a human being [SIC !],is a mere operation, at the beginning of the Secunda, I-II.1.1.), so too with faith. In a medium capable of approaching reality--the appropriate language for a proposition, the appropriate metal or paper for money--a historian like Emmanuel Hirsch or an engraver like St. Gaudens might come asymptotically close. So far ACTION. For faith, which is an ACTUS, we need intention... - And that, to come full circle, is why faith (by grace) must be a HUMAN ACT .

Propositions abstracted from the will would leave our desires unaffected , our subjective ends apart from the objective final end that God has granted us, our actions therefore finally unintelligible, our lives surd and unredeemed. The propositions of faith on a pate are so many pieces of paper, not identifiable as God's tender until we see them in use. (Eugene Ferdinand Rogers, A Theological Procedure in the Summa Theologiae: "Sacra Doctrina est Scientia" , A Dissertation, Yale University, May 1992, pp. 198-00. And see what follows on fides charitate informata, pp.200-204).
