---
title: "ECLIPSE"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/ECLIPSE"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.0
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\monas\Eclipse 1994-1995

The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative: Chapter 3

      Change in Interpretation: The Eighteenth Century

50 - The shift in outlook concerning narative biblical texts took place in the 18th century, in England and Germany.

England

52: At the end of the 17th century, shift toward scientific discourse divorced from imagination and sensibility .

52-4: Certain technical problems stand out. The notion of revelation becomes central . Two main issues: (a) Is historical revelation conceivable or credible, as different from natural revelation? (b) How well attested are the biblical accounts, especially of mircles? Since that Jesus is the Messiah is the only belief demanded by Xtianity and therefore revealed, the issue of the historicity of Jesus' miracles is doubly problematic. Reliability and moral integrity of the authors of the gospels.

Germany

54-55: The twin issues of the factuality of revelation and the credibility of the Bible were equally central in Germany. But the discussion was shaped by the question of the appropriate principles of interpretation ( given that tradition is excluded and all we have is the Bible itself ) to make good the claim that Scripture is perspicuous. The Bible was to be interpreted according to the same pples as any other book (GENERAL HERMENEUTICS), regardless of tradition, of the professions of faith, and of any interior illumination to grasp the 'spiritual' sense. ONLY LITERAL SENSE, not layers of meaning .

56: In earlier protestant interpretive tradtion, literal and religious meaning as well as factual accuracy had been identical. (WHY? - BECAUSE THEY WERE NOT CONFRONTED WITH A TEXT THAT STATES) . Now the question of the factuality (historicity) of revelation becomes independent. Either the historicity is demonstrated, or an explanation must be given for the history-like character of the text.

57: THE MEANING AND FACT ISSUE became important because of general respect for the Bible, whereas in England the discussion of the credibility was more purely philosophical .

One thing is the historicity of particular narratives of miracles. Another the factuality or historicity (of the meaning?) that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of God --a positive, direct intervention of God in history, of which the identity of Jesus more than his miracles is the guarantee of hIstoricity.

59: By the end of the 18th century, the independence of the question of historicity from all theological considerations was generally accepted , as in the case of any other text. But what was the literal-=historical sense: the brute facts, or their 'significance' for salvation? Some sought positivity-significance in the narrative portions of the Bible (Genesis, Gospels), some in the personality of Jesus (teaching, ministry and life).

Mediating interpretation

61- The "neologians" in Germany represented a mediating position between a flat denial of the factuality of the events narrated which concentrated in the transtemporal, conceptual religious meaning of the personality painted, and a denial of the siginificance to reduce the debate to the historicity. Neologians' dilemma between positive revelation and natural religion.

63: Polarization between those who, equating revelation with unique, salvific, miraculous occurrence qua occurrence, affirmed it, and those who denied positive revelation altogether and opted for strightforward theism or 'natural religion.'   

64: In biblical interpretation by contrast to theology, the polarization was between those whos affirmed the identity of the historical intention of the authors and the actual historicity of the events, and those who claimed that the events were meant as historical but only because of the circumstances of the authors who lived at a time of credultiy, but that the real meaning of the text is mythical (conveys a religious meaning of universal value).

64-65: At the beginning of the 19th century, certain theologians

insisted in the unity of pattern of history-like passages because constituted by a sequential order, in contrast to single and wholly portentuous miracles. "In other words, the crucial texts for the hermeneutical question in theology were the supposedly revelatory salvific narratives ("sacred history," " die heilige Geschichte "), whereas historical criticism maintained that each narrative had to be examined in its own historical context and in its own right: Genesis on its own, each gospel on its own.

The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative: Chapter 5

Hermeneutics and Meaning as Reference

86-87 In Germany. 18th century. - Orhodox literalism and pietist spiritual interpretation relied on the fact that the Bible was inspired. With the deistic controversies in Germany [which rendered historical revelation either superfluous or unfair], these "supernaturalists" had now to set forth reasons for the reliability of the biblical reports, which was not automatically admitted by the historical-criticists. They appealed to the integrity of the evangelists, the congruence of miracle with rational religion, the simplicity and life-likeness of the reports, and the historical fulfillment of the OT anticipations in the shape of the NT events. This amounts to acknowledging that historical explanation determines or is the explanation of theologically significant biblical narratives. " Conservative commentators increasingly treated the narrative portions of the Bible as a factually reliable repository of divine revelation rather than the immediately inspired text that it had been to orthodox and pietist commentators. " Identity of explicative meaning with the historical or ostensive reference of texts.

S. J. Baumgarten (1706-57)

88: As a believer, Baumgarten saw the Bible as the Word of God logically inseparable from the saving history described in it and from the efficacious appropriation of that narration. For Baumgarten the hermeneut, the Bible provided the indispensable modus cognoscendi for the revealed truth which it contains as a logically separable matter .

91: Baumgarten stressed that inspiration is not dictation . Human authors reflect rationally as they write and on what they write, tehy are inspired authors . Hence evolution toward meaning acording to theauthor's intention and, before long, the culture to which he belongs. The narrative (rather than doctrinal or parabolic) portions tell with absolute reliability the factual sacred history in which the revealed truth is embodied. Thus, from a Bible faith to a revelation faith .

91-2: Former conservatives explained the unity of the Bible by God's single authorship; consequently single sense of the text, which could be welded together by figural or typological interpretation if necessary. A generation later, the unity was not anymore in verbis but in re , and the res was primarily and crucially historical both in the sequence of outer biblical history as well as in the supposed historical connectedness and development of its ideas and outlooks (biblical theology).

93-95: But a few refused to reduce the meaning  to the historical factuality. Surely great texts amount to more than grammatical historical exegesis! Exegesis of the biblical narratives was not absolutely for all synonymous with working out their historical reference and the circumstances of the words.

Meaning as Ideal Reference

Wolff (Kant's rationalist enemy) influenced Baumgarten. He made distinctions between definitio nominalis and definitio realis , between texts that mean or refer to historical events and those that convey teachings .

103: Wolff strengthened the didactic and referential tendencies. General divorce of the Bible from literary art . In E#ngland, Dr. Johnson actually advocated it. It seemed to him unfitting and inappropriate to the sacred volume to mix the two things. Poet and literary critic should keep their hands away from it.

103-4: SUMMARY: " Explicative meaning was reference . Words refer to stable objects which were either space-time occurrences or didactic ideas, whether revealed or those of natural eligion. But since the biblical narratives were history-like and the putative events formed the basis for assertions of religious truth, the presumption was in favor of their making sense historically, whether in the way they stood or through a more or less drastic reconstruction of events. A long tradition had taken for granted that there was something historical in the narratives. Everything conspired to confine explicative hermeneutics to meaning as reference--to equate meaning with knowledge of potential or actual reality--and to make the primary reference historical rather than ideal. General (not theologically privileged) hermeneutics and biblical-historical criticism grew up together , and historical criticism by and large was the dominant partne r."

The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative: Chapter 6

Biblical Hermeneutics and Religious Apologetics

105: History tended to dominate explication, especially of narratives, while general hermeneutics tended to govern the applicative meaning of the use of the Bible, which did not appear to be reducible to mere historical truth. Biblical hermeneutics pivoted between the interests (sometimes in tension) of historical criticism and religious interpretation

Textual sense and religious application

107: The profit one derived from the Bible appeared to accrue to the sense of the texts temselves rather than to a subtle relationship between a text and the activity of reading . One had to distinguish betweeen explicative sense and applicative meaning , though the distinction was tenuous and obscure.

108-99: The world of 18th century German exegesis was largely precritical (in the Kantian sense) and prerelativistic . Words and passages were thought to have a discernible, usually unequivocal sense, when well written. The author selected from the treasury of words already there according to his intention; their meaning was a matter of convention. There was no problem of communication. The lessons we draw from a text are not merely a matter of explicating its sense but of applying it to our own situation. [IT SEEMS THAT THE HISTORIAN--BELIEVER OR NOT, WOULD DETERMINE THE EXPLICATIVE MEANING, AND THE RELIGIOUS EXEGETE ITS APPLICATION?]. "The interpreter's task... seems to be like that of skilled carpenter carefully prying loose a prefabricated frame from one building  and then, having cut it down properly, fitting it into another with equal care." The exegete compares the verbal sense then and now, and as a result renders his applicative verdict. One perceives the states of affairs or ideas referred to, which one grasps regardless of their linguistic embodiment . Individual workds appeared to be the basic units of meaning.

110: "Hermeneutic theory in the late 18th century is governed by the assumption of the accessibility of the original meaning or sense of texts, a sense that transcends and therefore controls the difference and relation between the activities of explication and application."

110: " Applicative reading was no less objective than application. The abiding religious truth of the Bible, whatever it is, was to be determined right from the texts themselves, even if it could also be discovered elsewhere. The text is accessible to explicative and its subject matter to applicative reading. Belief in the authority and unity of the Bible declined but confidence in its meaningfulness remained strong, especially if one did not have to believe that all of it is equally meaningful ."

111: According to Johan Salomo Semler (1725-91), successor of Baumgarten, application should take place according to

universal moral and religious principles. "Moral" meant, among other things, spiritual in contrast to physical truth or reality; this precluded the equal inspiredness of all biblical books, for not all of them had the same religious worth.

Applicative hermeneutics: The conservatism

 of the German Enlightenment

113: When it came to the meaningfulness of the Bible there were few pure skeptics in the German Enlightenment. The Bible embodied religious truth. Even Strauss was surprised at the negative reaction of his Life of Jesus , for his results about the reliability of the narrative reports concerning the messianic uniqueness of Jesus led to a reevaluation of the myth of the incarnate Savior. Only Reimarus denied historicity and religious meaning to the Bible. For Lessing, "The leter is not the spirit. Objections against the letter of the Bible are not against the spirit and the religion. The Apostles existed before the writings, thus the whole truth of the religion cannon possibly rest on the writings. Not the Bible but its subject matter is to be honored, and the latter was there independently of the Bible.

116: To the extent that its applicative meaning is true religion (whatever it may be), Lessing held the Bible in honor. On that score, unlike Reimarus, he had little doubt. The Bible may be appreciated in the light of more general religious ideas and truths.

Applicative meaning and religious apologetics

117: From Locke's On the Reasonableness of Xtianity to Kant's Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone , practically all works saw religion, including chiefly Xtianity, as significant. In their effort to render Xtianity reasonable they relied on applicative meaning .

118: If the religious meaning of the Bible (including the history-like narratives) did not depend logically on its connection with these stories and events, then the Bible was historically dispensable. But was it dispensable religiously?. For Lessing the Bible contains religion but does not define it; though not religiously indispensable it is religiously meaningful .

119: Those who believed the stories do not make literal sense (vgr. miracles) could argue in two ways. They could claim an ideal rather than ostensive referent and attribute religious meaning to the former. Or could claim that the stories do not make literal sense but refer ostensively to facts to be reconstructed by historians. [Problemmatic view: for what is the religious signficance of a reconstructed state of affairs?].. In this latter vein, the Brittish Conyers Middleton (1683-1750): The first three chapters of Genesis are not to be understood literally, but this makes no difference, for its meaning was a metaphysical truth. The fall of man is a moral fable that presents religious doctrines and duties as a fiction of sensible persons and facts. Its effects and influence on Xtianity is the same in both cases. Despite of his characterization of the story as allegorical, Middleton is cautious about divesting it of al factual reference.

122: Hermeneutics was in principle closer than historical criticism to an apologetical enterprise in theology or religious philosophy . The time would come when biblical scholars would pay slight if any attention to hermeneutics. All endeavors would be exclusively and directly connected with issues of historical criticism, particularly with the historicity of Jesus' life. But in the 18th century the mutual historical pertinence of 'faith' and 'historical judgments' was not yet a given.

The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative: Chapter 7

Apologetics, Criticism, and the Loss of Narrative Interpretation

124: Hermeneutics is theory of exegesis (that is, of interpretation of [written] texts). General hermeneutics applies to all written texts. Biblical hermeneutics applies to the case of the Bible in particular, which is (assumed to be) a religious text . In the Bible's case the principles of exegesis pivoted between historical criticism and religious apologetics. The explicative meaning, by the eighteent century, was identified with the ostensive or ideal reference. Applicative meaning or religious meaningfulness was either a truth of revelation embodied in an indispensable historical event, or a universal spiritual truth known independently of the text but exemplified by it, or a compromise that amounted to claim that while the historical fact is indispensable to revelation, the meaningfulness of revelation depends on its being set in some broader religious or moral context. Non-referential explication did not exist until the mythical thesis was applied to bhe Bible.

Practically everybody thought that the Bible was religiously meaningful.

The Gospel Story and the Hermeneutics of Mediating Theology

125: The sense of the Gospel narrative was identified by Christians with the history of Jesus the Messiah, and the deists (who believed that monotheism, immortality and happiness-altruism are the substance of natural religion) discerned this as the true sense of the Gospel narratives, the messianic history being merely their outward trapping . However some took it that all the narratives refer to actual events and describe them as they happened, whereas others leaned toward rationalism: the Gospels are historical, but their religious apoplication or meaningfulness is universal and not reducible to the Bible. For some, this universal meaning was knowable without the Bible; Locke, who considers the Gospels historical, is more ambiguous on this point in his The Reasonableness of Christianity .

126: The mediating theologians rejected the Calvinists', Puritans' and Supernaturalists' historical view of the story of the fall of Adam. However, unlike the deists, they kept applicative meaning to the story: need of redemption because we are affected  in our moral capacity and in our original immortality. Natural religion needs to be perfected by revealed religion, but without the traces of our need of redemption the biblical story would be  religiously meaniingless. Jesus is intelligible but not deducible. That he lived and was the Messiah needs to be supported by miracles and witnesses, but without our vague experience of need of redemption His life would be religiously meaningless for us. Thus mediating theology reversed the direction of the previous precritical interpretation of the biblical stories by inserting them in a wider frame of meaning.

128: The argument of mediating theology remained essentially the same till the middle of the 20th century: mankind's general religious and moral experience is the framework of applicative meaningfulness. Schleiermacher, Ritschl, Brunner, Bultmann, Karl Rahner, Gerhard Ebeling, Pannenberg and Moltmann all have been agreed that the religious meaniningfulness (as distinct from demonstration of the truth of Christianity) must be perspicuous through its relation to other accounts of general human experience . "To the mediating theologians, the unique truth of Xtianity is discoverable only by divine, self-communicating grace (or revelation), And this has to be grasped through a risky, uncertain act of faith, because the grace of revelation to which it refers is indemonstrable. But the possibility of this grace and the meaniningfulness of what is revealed involve more than an appeal to divine authority, namely, the appropriatenes to the human condition." Natural and supernatural light converge.

129: I have used the term apologetics to cover (among other things) this appeal to a common ground between analysis of human experience by direct natural and by some distinctively Christian thought. While (they say) their predecessors wanted to prove that salvation comes through Jesus, they only want to show that it is meaniningful to us. Meaninigfulness of the specific Christian 'language game' among all the other language games people pay. Even though the Bible generally no longer authorizes what one believes--by providing either the reliably informative contents or the warrants for believing them--it has and does provide the indispensable, factual informative, and religiously meaningful content in this instance ."

Religious Apologetics and the Loss of Narrative Meaning

130: Mediating theologians and their left-wing opponents agreed that the criteria for what makes sense, for what is morally and religiously significant, are general, independently of whether or not the Bible satisfies this demand and provides reliable information. Thus it had become a matter of fitting the biblical story into another world with another story rther than incorporating the world into the biblical story . On the other hand, mediating theologians and right-wingers agreed that the NT made the affirmation of Jesus being the Savior literally (though not necessarily all the miracles and Virgin birth are historical), whereas left-wingers denied that that is the real meaning of the text, or at least said that it is impossible to check such meaning against the facts. The latter thought that what the Gospel narratives say, if taken literally, is insignificant and therefore cannot be what the texts mean, because what the texts mean is religiously significant.

132: Why was not the religious meaniningfulness of the biblical narratives denied? Because unlike critical-historians, who fancied themselves neutral, the theologians were hermeneuts whose reading was apologetically implicated .

132: Only a few deists went all the way: what the Gospels say is not only not true and unverifiable but insignificant-remainders of ancient superstition about miraculous and personal divine intervention. They cannot be demythologized because what they say has no religious significance to be rescued .

133: The apologetical impulse meant that the Gospel narratives could only be interpreted in two ways. Either their explicative and applicative meaning (supernaturalists and mediating th.) is that of reference to Jesus the Messiah in historical fact, or (for rationalists and their successors) this is only their mythological form, their substance being the presentation in paradigmatic form of a message about human life as God intended it. Now two options were automatically eliminated: (1) Reimarus' claim that the story means what it says and is a lie. (2) The disjunction eliminates the explication of these accounts as primarily "narrative"--that they tell a story of salvation, an ialienable ingredient of which is the rendering of Jesus as  Messiah, and that whether or not he was so in historical fact, or thought of himself as Messiah, (i.e. whether the story refers or not), or whether the notion of a Messiah is still a meaningful notion, are different questions altogether. To the "narrative" perspective, these latter questions would have to do not with meaning or hermeneutics but with an entirely separable historical and theological judgment. Hermeneutically, it may well be the most natural thing to say that what these accounts are about is the story of Jesus the Messiah, even if there was no such a person; or, if there was, he was not in fact the Messiah; and quite regardless of whether or not he thought of himself as such; and regardless finally of the possible applicative significance of such a story and of the messianic concept to a modern context. Many elements may enter into the way a story makes sense, but its sheer narrative shape is an important and distinctive one which should not be confused with others--especially that of estimating its abiding religious meaning and that of assessing the narrative's cultural context or the reliability of the 'facts' told in the story.

134: Hermeneutics stood between religious apologetics and historical criticism, and these two worked against the narrative option. The historian had no interest in applicative interpretation but only in explication. For the historian the meaning of history-like STATEMENTS is the spatiotemporal occurrences to which they refer. His business is to reconstruct the most likely course of these putative events or, if he finds evidence that there were none, to give credible historical explanations for the accounts having been written in their specific way. He must appeal to the ordinary, nonmiraculous experience of people, to the cultural conditions in which the texts were written, to likely motives, and to parallel writings. This leads to a satisfactoy historical explanation. The real history in which the historian is interested is not what is narrated or the fruit of its narrative shape, but that to which the story refers or the conditions that substitute for such a reference.

135: Historical-critical analysis cannot be sympathetic to an interpretation for which the narrative shape, theme, and course are of the greatest interest because they constitute the story's meaning , an interpretation that is not governed, as historical procedure is bound to be, by a THEORY OF MEANING either as ostensive (or ideal) reference or as an extension of such reference. The latter is governed by a referential theory of meaning [CORRESPONDING TO THE REFERENTIALITY OF STATEMENTS?]) or by the coggnate identification of meaning with knowledge .

135: The situation has Remained the same since the 18th century. The historical critic does something other than narrative interpretation with a narrative because he looks for what the narrative refers to... He is not wrong, but unfortunately he also is not apt to see the logical difference between what he does and what a narrative interpretation might be and yield. He is likely to think instead that a procedure that is neither a practical religious use of the narrative (a use which he not alwayus countenances), nor yet his own method with its particular conceptual tools, simply cannot exist; and certainly he does not believe that it can have the serious implications for a religious use of the narratives that he expects from the fruits of his own procedure. Nor would he easily tolerate the notion  that his own procedure and narrative interpretation might have to live side by side without yielding a single overall fruit for a given narrative, that the two procedures might in given cases have divergent outcomes impossible to bring into harmonious balance.

136: In short: neither religious apologists nor historical critics were able to take proper and serious account of the narrative feature of the biblical stories. And this is all the more striking because all of them noted it and one way or another thought it significant .

Narrative Reading between Reference and Emotionalism

136: In the 18th century, development of serious literary realism which culminates wqith the French realistic novel of the 19th. The preconditions were there for understand9ind the biblivcal narratives in thesame terms. Both shared thedescription of random and ordinary human bkeings caught up in a real world which defines them, in which they are at home, but which can also pin them down by the swep of majestic forces of a moral or a morally neutral sort. Yet nobody pursued the possibility that thebiblical stories, including miracle reports, might make sense more nearly as realistic narratives--no matter what this would do to their permanent religious import or factual status . There are various levels of explanation for this phenomenon.

138: Both religious apologetics and historical criticism were deeply enmeshed in the question of the factual status of the narrated events to neutralize this issue: reliable information about the 'historical Jesus.' And so are we. Once the deists had raised the question of external evidence for revelation, thje status of factuality for the meanining of revelation became a permanent item in religious argument .

138: The situation in the study of the Bible was one with the prevailing philosophical outlook, influenced by assumptions about ther natural sciences . Assumptions about the way statements and texts are to be understood are of a piece wit5h kgkeneral episktemology. Meaning is reference to true or actual states of affairs. Theory of meaning is virtually identical with theory of the knowledge of reality . Empiricists, therefore, tended to consxign literary art to the pleasurable emotions .

140: The assignment of beauty and aesthetic appreciation to feeling rather than cognitivity or desire was by no means original with Kant. While sensing the crucial place of aesthetic and teleological judgments, the bridge between moral experience and scientific judgment remained impossible, for we do not have the intellectual intuition requisite for the genuine grasp of the real and intelligible world either in its internal unity or in the manner it coheres with our sensible experience. Aeskthetic experienc remained for Kant a matter of analyzing the determination of the subject's experience rather than a recognition of objective beauty. The task was impossible once meaning had become identified kwith reference, and therefore with knowledge of the referent. Everything kthat was not subject to sceintific or experimental check was consigned to emotionalism or meaninglessness .

141: In hermeneutics, epistemological theory dominated the way texts mean and automatically turned inquiry into the senske of a passage into inquiry into its ostensive or ideal reference .

142: The beginnings of aesthetic appreciation and analysis of the Old Testament followed the trend. Bishop's Lowth's De Sacra Poesi Hebreorum (1753) stayed away from realistic narratives and from theological and factual questions.

The English Novel, Its Cultural Context and the Bible

142: Beyond technical explanations for the lack of narrative interpretation, there are cultural considerations. In England, where a body of realistic narrative literature and a certain amount of criticism of that literture was building up, there arose no corresponding tradition of biblical writings and no narrative interpretation of them. In Germany, where a body of critical analysis of the biblical writingxszs grew up in the second half of the 18th, there was no spontaneous development of realistic narrative and its critical appraisal.

143: Clara Reeve, a writer and critic of the day in England, wrote:

"The Romance is an heroic fable, which treats of  fabulous persons and things.- The novel is a picture of real life and manners, and of the times in which it is written. The Romance in lofty and elevated language, describes what never happened nor is likely to happen.- The novel gives a familiar relation to things, as pass every day before our eyes, such as may happen to our friend, or to ourselves; and the perfectionk of it, is to represent every scene, in so easy and natural a manner, and to make them appear so probable as to deceive us int a persuasion (at least while we are reading) that all is real, until we are affected by the joys and distresses of the persons in the story, as if they were our own. " ( The Progress of Romance , 1785).

144: Bolingbroke's famous phrase that history was 'philosophy teaching by example' embodied the common view. - The realistic novel contrributed to an awareness 'of the ill-defined frontier between history and story, between truth and lie, between reality and fiction.'

145: The characters were set within a specific historical time and within a definite and recognizable economic and social structure, interplay with which served to focus their character, station, and identity."

146: This tradition of prose fiction, hewing close to the world of reality--its logic not simply that of illustrated theme or system but that of cumulative rendering of persons and reality through narrative continuity in time --suffered no interruption during the romantic era.

147: The English novel continued to present social structures as given and eternally fixed. In France, the awareness of powerful, shifting historical forces transformed the novel's moralistic and individualistic perspective. Reality was instead constituted by the fateful depth portrayed in the transaction between these forces and the 'random' individuals whom they engulf 'as it were accidentally' and force to react one way or another .

148: Though novels could incarnate moral themes, novels were not moral tales but renderings of a temporally connected world in which interpersonal and social experience was related to moral existence in a way that was as intimate as it was ambiguous. The ambiguity was the fruit of locating temporally sequential personal life within a broader, inescapably social rather than merely ethical context .

150: On apologetic as well as historical grounds the question of the factuality of biblical reports, and the cognate debate over whether its putative factuality or the recognition of some central ideational themes was really the important thing about the Bible, prevented any serious attention to narrative shape in its own right. In both cases what the biblical narratives are all about is something other than their character as cumulatively or accretively articulated stories whose themes emerge into full shape only through the narrative rendering and deployment itself [NARRATIVES ARE NOT "ABOUT", FOR THEY ARE NOT ABOUT ANYTHING DETACHEABLE, AS STATEMENTS ARE. IN THIS REGARD, THEY ARE LIKE A PARTICULAR PIECE OF MUSIC ].When interest is concentrated on the fact issue, the unmarked frontier between history and realistic fiction becomes impenetrable; one is either on one side of it or the other, and the decision between them becomes the crucial issue. The peculiar and intricate logic of narration is pushed into the background. Empirical historical investigation into what must probably happened, together with supporting hypotheses and argument, is a different enterprise from the endeavor to set forth a temporal world, which is the peculiar way in which realistic narative means or makes sense. Not that one is more legitimate than the other, but one cannot do both at once, nor will the one kind of analysis do duty for the other.

151: In England, concerning the Bible, realism meant the discussion of the fact question or else its treatment in the spirit of the dictum that history is 'philosophy teaching by example.'

152: Like history and the novel, much biblical narrative in explicative interpretation is not 'system' or pure factual description but the cumulative rendering of a temporal framework through realistic depiction and chronological continuity. The argument from prophecy and its fulfillment, the logic of which rested in large part on just such a cumulative connection, receded from view early in the century. Its disappearance was due to its forced transfer from a formal narrative world of figural and literal interconnection to the arena of debate about the evidence for and against its factual claims. Its logic was basically altered, indeed destroyed, as a result from this shift from one world to the other .

152: Such sense of a narrative framework as continued to exist among religious (and not merely scholarly ) readers was now no longer chiefly that of providentially governed biblical history in which earlier and later biblical depictions were connected as type and antitype and into which every moral and historical experience had been fitted. All this had now changed. Such narrative sense as remained in the reading of the Bible found the connective narrative tissue which served simultaneously as its own effective thread to present experience in the history of the souls conversion and perfection. Christ is not reduced to a subjective experience. Christ's death and resurrection are redeeming events. It is not the lack of an objective savior but the location of the cumulative narrative bond which indicates how loose and tentative is the hold of this profound religious movement on a context or world, temporal, eternal, or both, in which one may feel at home .

153: In figural interpretation the figure itself is real and without any detraction from that reality it prefigures the reality that will fulfill it. This figural relation allows the fitting of each present occurrence and experience into a real, narrative framework or world. Each person, each occurrence is a figure of that providential narrative in which it is also an ingredient. In that fashion all experience belongs in a real world . In evangelical piety the relation is reversed. The atoning death of Jesus is real and efficacious. Though real in its own right, the atoning Redeemer is at the same time a figure or type of the xtian journey; for this is the narrative framework, the meaningful pattern whithin which alone the occurrence of the cross finds its applicative sense. What is real and what therefore the xtian really lives is his own pilgrimage; and to its pattern he looks for the assurance that he is really living it.

The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative : Chapter 8

Hermeneutics and Biblical Authority in German Thought

155: In Germany the sensibility was not ready to consider seriously the possibility of fact-like meaning which might not be fact. As long as biblical narratives were read realistically they were seen as automatically historical; and yet such a reading could always be combined with a reading of a piously inward or an ethicist sort. The old realistic sensibility was gone, in which the narrative itself rendered a world at once real and meaningful, which was identical with the narrative, while serving also to orient men's dispositions.

Biblical Study in the Later 18th Century

156: Scholarly engrossment in the Bible produced three interacting types of biblical study: critical, hermeneutical, and theological.

157: Historical criticism started with Spinoza, who suggested a natural history of the development of the Pentateuch. It became a lively academic movement in Götingen and Halle and trenched directly on the faith of ordinary churchgoers. Though acquainted with deism and empiricism, the Germans focused on the Bible as a written document and the shape in which it has come down to us. Criticism of the writings went along and became part of the criticism of facts. This was related to the Lutheran orthodoxy that the text itself and not merely the things told constitutes the literal Word of God. Revelation and inspiration are supplementary aspects of the same belief. For this theological position there was no precise parallel in England. In Germany the interest in the writings was to persist even when a more secular and critical day had arrived and biblical inspiration waned. The pietists promoted this loyalty to the text itself.

158: Hermeneutics developed together with historical-critical literature. The former explored the relation of ordinary and general meaning, logical, referential and religious, to the peculiar meaning of the supposedly inspired text. The latter applied to the Bible the literary, philological, and historical tools used in the analysis of other ancient documents in order to arrive at reasonable conclusions about the writings' literary type, origin, historical context, and factual veracity.

158: A huge body oftechnical literature about the Bible developed

in the last third of the 18th century, including "biblical theologies" which attempted to relate the fruits of technical scholarship to the religious character, importance and (it was hoped) unity of the canon.

Reliability, Unity, and Authority of the Bible

159: In the three mentioned areas the biblical narratives garnered the greatest attention, starting with Johann Gotfried Eichhhorn's historical introduction to the three first chapters of Genesis (1779) and Johann David Michaelis' Einleitung in die göttlichen Schriften des Neuen Bundes (1788). This attention to narratives is due to their crucial impact on inherited blelief. The historical critics insisted with Gabler that dogma "must depend on exegesis and not conversely. " However supernaturalists insisted on the historical correctness of specific biblical reports, and Pietists on the harmony of apparently discordant reports of the same events.

160: The cultural context out of which the author of a biblical text wrote tended to supersede the importance of the author's intention concerning its specific reference, in contrast to literal-historical as well as figural radings.

161: Deists and historical critics agreed on rejecting figural interpretation. On the other hand, historical critics were more aware than deists of the influence of cultural conditions on the sense of the biblical writings, and werk interested in the character of the Bible as a writing independently of its reliability. The latter interest was bound to raise the question of the kind of unity of the Bible.

161: If the Bible is not identical with God's word, then the unity of the canon is purely historical, to be determined by the consideration of each book on its own historical context. Then, too, many of the books are of purely historical and not permanent religious interest.

162: The fragmentation of a unitary canon was at least as grave a threat to the traditional status of the Bible as authority for belief as was the direct assault on its historical reliability . The divine authority of the Bible in prescribing belief is possible only if its meaning is the same throughout, if it is essentially clear, and if it is the product of special divine communication.

162: Both the question of the reliability and of the unity focused on the history-like narratives and the doctrines traditionally associated with them: creation, the fall, the stages of Israelite history looking toward messianic fulfillment, the NT, and the second coming of Xt . The point of coordination between theology and hermeneutics was the unitary meaning of the canon. But all these issues became a tangled web. If dogmatic theology was not to depend on exegesis, at least it could not contradict it.

163: It was thought that, freed from the chains of dogmatic and philosophical interpretation, the text of the Bible would serve as the direct basis for theological assertions . Figural interpretation, which had provided unity in precritical days, was considered as an arbitrary intrusion of supernaturalism  into explanation of the Bible's unitary meaning . What seemed need was an explanation of the Bible's unity based on natural and general canons of meaning. The inspiredness ( Theopneustie ) of the Bible had to be subject to the demands of historical meaning.

The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative: Chapter 9

The Quest for a Unitary Meaning

165: Three divergent directions in biblical theology:

First Group: Gabler vs Stäudlin

155:  Gabler (inaugural lecture in 1787): Biblical theology as understood by him tended to converge toward historical-critical analysis. One works from the text's words, as used at the time they were written, and the single, and never more than single, meaning of the text and its author, regardless of one's estimate of the soundness of his position. Thus consideration of the historical circumstances under which the text was written was an element in estimating the explicative sense. Historical criticism and general hermeneutical procedure are the basis for biblical theology, which extracts what is permanently valuable in the Bible.

167: C. F. Stäudlin of Göttingen, who no more believed in miracles than Gabler and for whom also religious and moral ideas, if true, are transhistorical, fixed metaphysical entities, argued however that normative or permanently valid ideas are part of the explicative, not merely applicative, meaning of texts. If one confines one's reading to grammatical-historical and historical-critical reading one would never get the religious dimension of the text. Yes, the texts are to be read applicatively, with their inspiration in mind and with one's own religious and rational dispositions at work, but this applicative reading is not merely Eisegesis or a peculiar slant on the texts, but rather explicative meaning that shows dimensions in them which remain hidden from merely historical reading . This shows the thinness of the distinction between explicative and applicative meaning .

Second Group: G. T. Zachariä

167: Second group of men calling themselves biblical (by contrast to systematic or dogmatic) theologians. Their aim was to demonstrate the correctness of traditional Protestant doctrines from a conceptual analysis of the Bible, ordering them into a coherent whole partly through a logical and partly through a historical scheme. But in the process the doctrines became more and more filled with a rationalistic content . Thus the fall was a general loss of original happiness, little related to the account of Genesis. And the unity of the Bible lied in these religious concepts, with or without development in them from the Old to the New Testament. In any case, rationalist notions constitute the heart of biblical theological ideas.

168: G. T. Zachariä (1729-66) at Göttingen. Contradictory position: He defended the literal by contrast to the allegorical meaning of the biblical realistic narratives such as the Genesis, but at the same time considers them sensuous formulations of truths, accommodated to the level of the unsophisticated. The doctrine of accommodation forces him into the very allegorical interpretation of the stories which he had rejected on grammatical-historical grounds.

170: While realistic narrative interpretation functioned historically for Z, it finally was hermeneutically insignificant. He tended to opt for meaning as ideal reference: even though the accounts are true, their meaning lies in the concepts sensuously (i.e. allegorically) represented in them. This forced the narratives into a didactic, non-narrative interpretive framework .

171: Time and again he separates the section of grammatical-historical or realistic meaning from the theological truths to be learned, separated from their sensuous expression. And these theological truths are concepts and propositions of a rationalistic kind [extrabiblically knowable and known?] , such as one God who created man for happiness. The progress in the forms that biblical ideas took, from sensuous to spiritual, and the fact that the meaning of the Bible lies in concepts, pointed 'biblical theology' in another direction: the unity of the canon lies in the development of the moral and religious ideas taught in it .

Third Group: Cocceius , Bengel, and the Heilgeschichtliche Schule

173: The third group was influenced by Johannes Cocceius (17th century). who saw the unity of the Bible in the history of salvation it depicts as well in the pervasive theopneustie that makes it a means of grace to the faithful. Let us explore the roots of the biblical theology and "salvation history" characteristic of the neo-orthodoxy in Xtian thought in the 20th century.

173: This third group of biblical theologians claimed that the continuity of the two Testaments is historical, earlier outlooks and events anticipating by a kind of built-in incompleteness the events and meaning patterns that fulfilled them later. The unity of successive accounts is general rather than specific, and it is external to the accounts themselves ; it is the 'real' and logically separable historical or temporal continuity among the segments of time, depicted separately by separate accounts.

174: All this is a far cry from figuration's joining of separate accounts into a single narrative, coherent or identical with the temporal sequence rendered by it through the direct and specific juxtaposition of earlier and later events . Now the  relation between the earlier and later is historical rather than storied . For these theologians the unity of the Bible came to be the unity of a specific theme--the history of salvation, enacted gradually in the events, and the general shape of the cumulative interpretation of writings of a religious and cultural community.

175: These biblical theologians avoided conflict with historical criticism and sought to be in harmony with those views which regarded religious meaning as accessible to people who knew how to discern general patterns of meaning in history and human experience. In this third kind biblical theology finds the most strenuous endeavor to discover a modern substitute for figuration to show forth the unity of the canon .

Bengel on Letter, Spirit and history :

175: Bengel (1687-1752) : Combining scholarship with devoutness, he sought to unite the Bible's inspiredness with its content as a reliable record not so much of dogma as of the sequence of historical fact in which the divine economy of salvation is at work, and both of these with a critical analysis of the text as a written document (179). Literal grammatical meaning was his craft. But there is an inner word or meaning given with the outer word; and appropriate to this state of affairs there is a grammatical reading, open to all who have the training and native ability, and a spiritual reading restricted to those who are awakened to it by the Holy Spirit. In other words, there is a special stance which allows religious access to the truth of scripture, i.,e. to its applicative interpretation and to its explicative meaning (177-8). The meaning of the inspired words is their reference to the sacred events they portray in historical sequence; they refer ostensively with descriptive accuracy (176). The Bible is a unity in meaning, on the one hand because it is a reliable record of a special and connected historical sequence (the economy of salvation), on the other because it is pervaded by one and the same spirit working through writers and text and calling upon the reader for the same stance of faith (179).

Biblical Theology as the History of Salvation

179: As one moves beyond the 18th, the identity between history of salvation and universal history began to break down, and then the factual data of the history of salvation have to belong in the same common framework as any other temporal sequence. The relation of the history of salvation to the sequence of ordinary historical events had never been cleared up in the scheme of salvation history . Now the scheme was made more and more complex to avoid head-on collision. Increasingly, salvation history, while remaining the real reference and unitary meaning of the Bible, was taken to be a sequence of temporal occurrences with a sequence of interpretations and cumulative responses to them. History of salvation and history of interpreted and reinterpreted tradition join together, depending on the positioning of the reader or interpreter (180). The Bible is not simply, if at all, a book of dogma for intellectual assent. While it is book of fact, it is obviously far more than that. Its inspiration and its topics involve writer, text, and reader in a common mode of disposition or faith. To hold these and other aspects of meaning together is in effect to unite explicative and applicative meaning. To do so is to affirm that the Bible's unitary meaning is not accessible except by the special self-positioning of the reader as a person toward the text and what it 'witnesses to.' The history of salvation, into which the reader is drawn, becomes a 'witness to a history' rather than a narrative text (180-181) .

181-182: This is the shape in which salvation history entered the 20th century's neo-orthodoxy. This outlook was far from realistic narrative interpretation. In the heilgeschichtliche version of biblical theology its meaning is a function of the temporal sequence of events and interpretive tradition to which the story refers, together with the interpretive stance taken toward this complex sequence. Meaning is the upshot of the interaction of these factors. Event and interpretation are logically distinct but not separately available. The meaning of a realistic passage is the event and its interpretation. Precritical realistic narrative interpretation, on the other hand, never gave such an independent status to the positioning perspective upon the story, nor did it separate story sequence from actual sequence .   

The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative: Chapter 10

 Herder on the Bible: The Realistic Spirit in History

183: Pietism leading to a salvation-historical interpretation of the narrative unity of the Bible was not alone in bringing together the history of events with the history of group perspective, and with the material contribution of a distinctively present self-positioning to their interpretation. A similar outlook characterized the romantic reaction in theology against the fashions of the religious Enlightnement at the end of the 18th. Its most distinguished representatives were Johnann Gottfried Herder (1744-1803), and Friedrich Schleiermacher (1769-1843) a generation later.

183: For Herder poetry is "the mother tongue of the human race."

184: The Old Testament represents the most ancient and natural poetic spirit and must be read in the most human fashion for it is written by men and for men. Human fashion here excludes technical literary criticism and technical distinction of genres. One has to enter imaginatively and empathetically ( Einfühlung ) into "the spirit of Hebrew poetry." [' Existential-narative' rather than 'objective-objectifying' reading? ].

185: Interpretation is not a technical or critical analysis of aesthetic products but an empathetic submission to the author, his depictions, and the atmosphere in which they arise: "Become with shepherds a shepherd..., with the ancients of the Orient and Easterner, if you wish to relish these writings in the atmosphere of their origin; and be on guard against abstractions... and enven more against all so-called artistry..." Paradoxically and inconsistently, though Hereder believed that the Bible contained normative religious truth, he limited the submission to the aesthetic mod e. No past mannifestation had any more normative claim on one's own religious, philosophical, moral, or even aesthetic positioning of oneself than any other. He saved himself from inconsistency by turning the Bible, and divine revelation, into the fullest expression of the one human spirit under the educative guidance of divine providence. To read the poetic spirit of the Bible is to read it as a divine gift.

186: More rationalistic commentators followed Herder but refused to stop where he stopped. For them historical verification became all-important and introduced such technical genres as allegory and myth. As for Herder, he was not uninterested in the question of the historical factuality of the biblical stories, but the context in which he reaised the issues of factuality and fact-likeness allowed them no ultimate explanatory status in their own right; neither constitutes an ultimate interpretive device, though he insists on the realism of the narratives and does not distinguish factuality from fact-likeness. Both were dependent variables of the one explanatory constant they represented in common: the experience of the spirit of the culture from which they had been written.

187: In the case of the Old and New Testaments the spirit was a historical experience. But Herder left the meaning of history ambiguous: he used it to refer to the past, res gestae , as well as to the narrative accounts of the past. To be 'historical,' then an account need not be of any secific occurrence that had actually taken place.

187: Hartlich and Sachs claim that H did nor care about biblical factuality. Falsely. H wrote: " Xtianity has an infinite stake in the simplicity and truth of this story. Whoever turns a gospel of Xt into a novel has wounded my heart, even though he had done so with the most beautiful novel in the world ."

188: Even when H makes a plea for the factual veracity or the simple, realistic quality of NT narrartives, his own point of view tends to remain at the aesthetic level, in the sense that the reader's most important task remains neither the reference nor the realism of the account but the direct Einfülung into the spirit of the account .

190: Despite H's view that natural instead of mirculous explanation should prevail when possible, he affirms the factual truth of many biblical miracles and of the resurrection. His ambiguity is not so much at the level of affirmation or denial of fact claims, but whether or not the factuality or the fact-likeness or realism of a narrative is a significan element in its meaning. He can remain quite ambiguous as to whether the meaning of a realistic passagge is the occurrences it refers to, or the depiction  it renders, or the spirit or outlook generated by such a writing. In the long run, the latter is the most important for him .

199: Rather than the reduction of meaning to ostensive reference, one observes in H's procedure the religious- apologetic motif which kept realistic interpretation at bay. This was done by casting tyhe Bible directly into the larger framework of applicative meaningfulness . In H's case this meant incorporatig the Bible's meaning into a developing 'spirit' which speaks aesthetically-religiously to our own spirit. Realistic and figural reading, which had allowed the reader to be incorporated and thus located in the world made accessible by the narration, here gives way to an independent spiritual self-positioning which then locates itself as well as specific past epochs by relating itself to earlier spiritual positionings, locating them in turn by their presentlly accessible, or spiritually present recapitulation. The result is a modern substitute for the unitary meaning of the Bible that had been provided in earlier days by figural interpretation as a fit extension of literal reading . Now that this cohesion has been ruptured and the older kind of configuration consigned to superstition, H has offered a higly ambiguous alternative suggestion for the unitary meaning of the Bible.

200: The emphasis of self-positioning that he shares with the pietists is not so much, as it was for them, a direct and religious relation to the religious 'objects' of the Bible (Jesus, his blood atonment, and his love, the divine Spirit directly speaking to our hearts from the pages of the Bible, etc.) but a direct relation to the spiritual history in which these objects are ingredient. Yet, in their own much more provincial way, Pietism and the later heilsgeschichtliche Schule were themselves, as well as H, related to the romantic and idealistic sensibility that shared the conviction that a free and self-conscious self-positioning toward the world is an indispensable factor in shaping the depiction of the world with its bearing on the self. It matters little whether this self was the Pietist's self dispositioning itself religiously, that of the Romantic dispositioning itself aesthetically in acute awarenesss of its own sensibility, that of the philosophical Idealist dispostioning itself in conceptual self-reflexiveness, or that of the budding Esistentialist, dispositioning itself in self-committing agency .

201: With Herder we are well on the road thakjt led to the eventual claim of the complete uniquen4ess of the Geisteswissenschaften within the spectrum of human knowledge, to the tendency toward historical relativism or 'historicism,' and toward the idealist conviction that the knowledge of every spiritual, cultural object (if not all data) has to be analyzed under the scheme of a subject-object, self-other or spirit-world correlation. H's thought bears a family resemblance to Kant's.

The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative

Chapter 11: The Lack of Realism in German Letters

The Sense of Present and Past

203-207: Herder with his Einfühlung with the past, with his becoming a sheperd with the biblical sheperds, and with his romantic dream of a primitive age closer to the original creation was not quite alone. His idea of the past made present in

a special empathetic experience is also found in Goethe, among others. But this idea is " finally utterly inimical to a realistic perspective of historical and history-like narrative " (202). It is a version of Kant's view of the self as free, even if the source of its freedom and the manner of its fitting into the causally connected world remains a mystery . This view neutralizes the seriousness of the causal connectedness of historical events [and of the historical involvement of the self itself]. "The sense of the reality of inwardness and its tension with external reality prevented a development of realistic narrative" [connected to social settings and history-like events]. The narative realism that had begun to develop in England did not make the same headway in Germany.

The level of realistic depiction

 

207-212: Neither the theater (Lessing) nor the novel was truly realistic in Germany. The depiction of character is finally a strictly moral, psychological business. The characters are stereotyped, a foreseeable mixture or ordinary good and evil, a set pattern of dispostition and behavior in which socio-economic dynamics enter only weeakly and externally . Despite the popularity of Scott, Dickens and Balzac in Germany, the balance of internal character development with portrayal of the external social world in German fiction had to await the novels of Thomas Mann .

Historicism and Realism

212-217: Realistic writing in the 18th in Germany did not go farther than Lessing. Romantic writing tended in  the opposite direction. Even the depiction of the connected development of a character through the impetus of external events--typical English motif--is no longer an object of praise. Historiography paralleled fiction .

Historicism emerged. ' Historicism is the rendering of mankind's unfinished story in which man, in his encounter with determined historical situations and developments, actually encounters himself writ large" (213), [that is, produced by history (?)] . But with their tendency to abstraction and universalization, what the German writers encountered wasthe collective spirit of an age or group. In this way they neutralized " historicism as the apprehension of the specificity and irreducibly historical particularity of cutltural change " (213)

The tendency toward universalization and spiritualization was due to the fact that the subject matter and bond of historical development was a universal subject, as culturally embodied or diffused consciousness--a universal spirit in a cultural form. This did not change in Germany because of its political conditions. While England and France had already had their political, economic and religious revolutions, Germany was fragmented and overwhelmingly agrarian. For the German intellectuals, socio-political conditions were externally fixed; otehrwise they were so threatening as not to be faced . Even those who like Goethe and Schiller, who had initially sympathized with the French revolution, drew back from depicting human nature and destiny through the interaction of human beings with the upheaval of the large-scale social and historical forces characteristic of their era.

The failure of realism

217-224: Biblical interpretation underwent the same fate. Even though its putative historicity and its narrative characteristics were usually recongized, the Bible failed to evoke clear appreciation of the significance of its narrative realism amomg commentators, even amogn those who like Herder, on aesthetic or historicist grounds, might have been expected to explore such an interpretive option. In Egnland, when the realistic quality of the religiously central biblical stories was acknowledged, it was cited as evidence of their historical veracity. These stories were taken to be facts, allegories, or falsehoods, and never realistic narratives.In Germany on the other hand, where there was strong interest in the Bible as writing, there was no strong tradition of realistic narrative. The upshot was the same as in England: the biblical text was never subjected to a reading in which the meaning of the realistic sotories was taken to be the realistic, fact-like depictions themselves, regardless of their reference, of the question of their factual truth or falsity, or of the 'spirit pervading the writing (217-218).

220: Narraitve interpretation of single stories and its extension into firgural interpretation of the whole Bible appeared on the surface to find successors in the Pietists and budding historicists like Herder, who rejected the Deist's crude identification of meaning with ostensive, predictive reference in the argument of the fulfillment of prophecy. But in the final analysis the precritical cohesion of historical reference with literal sense, rendering directly accessible the world literally depicted, came apart just as completely through dissolution into meaning as reference to the immanent development of events, and meaning as the development of a religious, interpretive stance and tradition. No matter to which side one gave priority, the meaning of the text was no longer the text's depiction, even if it was agreed that the text was realistic in character. Its realistic character was identified either with its factual reliability or with a unique realistic spirit in the tradition that produced the text. This identification, due to logical confusion between meaning and reference on the one hand and to religious-apologetical interests on the other, prevented the possibility of a straightforward appreciation of the narrative features of the biblical stories in their own right.

221-243: Interpretation came to concentrate on the fact-like character and the factual reliability of the history-like stories of the story of Jesus, especially as told in  the synoptic gospels. Friends and foes agreed that belief stood or fell with the historicity of the reports concerning the chief events of Jesus' life. The consternation caused by Strauss's Life of Jesus (1835) among scholars was due to its exploitation of their own consensus that traditional faith claims, though not limited to historical fact claims based on ostensively-referential textual interpretation, nonetheless had them for their indispensable (if insufficient) basis. And in Strauss's viuw, the most important of those were myths. Realistic narrative interpretation came in fact to be identical with the putative historical reconstruction of the events depicted in the story, either as Jesus' continuous life story, or as historical confirmation of some crucial aspects of his teaching and career. Narrative interpretation had given way to the ostensively referencing and the reconstructive procedure of historical criticism. On the one hand a bourgeois historical realism, seeking to reconstruct the personal 'facts,' and on the other a sweepingly romantic idealism concerned with religious meaning converged on the figure caught in the scholarly discussion iof the relation between 'historical' and 'faith' judgments.

Epilogue: "Faith," "History," and the "Historical Jesus"

224-225: Strauss had demonstrated to young radicals that historical exegesis of the gospels does not justify basing the dogma of divine-human reconciliaiton on the historical factuality of Jesus' history. From this Feurbach went on to suggest that the real meaning or interpretation of the dogma of reconciliation or freedom is the divine self-reconciling power of the human race. Marx went on to debunk this latter view in his Theses on Feuerbach , and in 1844 concluded that "For Germany the criticism of religion is in the main complete, and criticism of religion is the premise of all criticism." Marx was on the main right: the discussion of the relation between faith and history was more and more confined to specialists in theological faculties; the vast majority of German intellectuals went to other business.

227: The upshot of Marx's view of the criticism of religion was that the very development of historical-critical investigation into the gospels, whether in support or denial of Xtian belief in Jesus Christ, was itself already one of the signs that the crhistological belief or doctrine under investigation had ceased to be of historical significance. First the belief and then its scientific critique had had their day and ceased to be, the former after a long and majestic career, the latter after a brief moment of topicality. The very exercise of historical criticism of the gospels, whether positive or negative, was to this outlook and admission of the discernment that the real world in which we ineluctably exist is not the biblical stories' world, no matter whether  or not some of that world's individual components may be demonstrated to be real in terms of the world of history which we now accept as our real world. In the light of the completed 'criticism of religion,' the historical-critical investigation of the gospels is an admission of the fundamental cultural uninterest of the notion of christological salvation in history and of the notion of a relation between history and faith.

228-230: There is pathos in the intense literature on faith and history and in the critical-life-of-Jesus movement of the 20th, which is for specialists and has had so little cultural or relgious effect. And in how each 'historical Jesus' is supplanted by the next. And in the increasingly heavy, difficult, specialized conceptual apparatus that has to be invoked to rescue the meaningfulness and intelligibility of a supposedly universal claim at onece religious and historical, a claim said to be of the utmost importance for all sorts of conditions of men. And in the constant escape from anything that might be termed historical realism in the depictions of the Jesus of faith.

230-232: Though it is argued that Jesus is a historical person, he is placed in another depicted historical world than that into which literal and figural interpretation had cast him in precritical days. By something like figuration in reverse, he is now entered into another story. It may be a historically rendered world in which there is or there is not an element of transendence, or a world in which the real substance is 'salvation history.' In any event, the reinterpretation means that the reversal which started in the late seventeenth century has been fully effected. The elements of the stoy that figural interpretation had originally woven into one signle narrative have now been transposed into another framework. Their meaning, detached from their narrative setting, is now their reference to some other story, some other world, some other context of interpretation.

The sense of a world as well as of the individual's relation to it found in academic depictions does not only reflect the academic specialist but also the member of the middle-class with his this-wordly and yet idealizing sense of reality and human existence. Marx so far has been proven right against Schweitzer's praise of German theology and of the cultural and religious importance of the critical-historical investigation focused on Jesus.

The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative

Ch. 12: Strauss's Perfection of the 'Mythical' Option

The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative

Ch. 13: Hermeneutical Options at the turn of the Century

245-246: The mythophiles made the "fact issue" determinant.

Hence two stages in interpretation: (1) Literal or grammatical sense, and (2) Historical assessment. On the above basis,for those concerned with that, (3) Religious or applicative meaning--which had become highly problematic: purely arbitrary? dependent or independent of the fact issue?

247-248: The notion of interpretation: Interpretation must be historical, not only grammatical. It has to take into account the originating culture and to concern itself with tactuality. Thus int does not deal only with the words but with the subject-matter of which the text speaks ( Sacherklarung ). These are the general principles of interpretation; they apply to all texts and exclude a theologically privileged interpretation of the Bible.

249-250: Distinction between the writer's meaning (intended by author) and the reader's meaning . Thus, the Gospel's writers meant literally the miraculous or supernatural events, whereas we hear them as mythical (non-ostensive), thanks to historical and philosophical criticism.

251-255: Ernesti in particular opposed the pietists' identification of the coincidence of the inspired text and their own inspired meaning, particularly when it was figurative. The literal sense ought to prevail because it is the primary use of words. The three criteria--use of words, historical circumstances governing their use, and author's intention--are really 3 aspects of one principle. Ernesti does not think of the author's intention as a privileged realm beyond his words, to which he or we, the exegetes, have a special access. The words constitute the intention, and any meaning beyond them is a special subject matter which is not within the confines of general hermeneutics, but a 'res' specially revealed by the Holy Spirit.

Ernesti opposed everybody else, for he thought that hermeneutics does not extend to subject matter (to historical facts in themselves) but only to what the text: " in interpretatione niihil aliud quaeritur, quam quid dictum sit, non quale fit aut quam vere dictum " (cited on p. 258). " The priority of the subject-matter over the words is the fateful decision of late eighteenth century hermeneutics" (254) . " The choice of subject matter finally came to be between two extremes of literally intended accounts which are reliable factual reports, and historically understood mythical accounts which have no essential connection with actual reporting" (255) .

The Range of Subject Matter Proposals

Frei's purpose is to present "the variety of hermeneutical

positions concerning biblical narratives which prevailed at the turn from the 18th to the 19th" (p. 266). "Given the overriding theological issue, and given the hermeneutical agreement among all schools except that of Ernesti--that the meaning of a text is kits subject matter-- the hermeneutical choice had to be between literalistic Supernaturalism and the mythical school" (p. 266).

255: Later the debate would be under the title of 'the relation between faith and history.' But at the turn of the 18th to 19th it centered on the subject matter as constituting the meaning of the biblical narratives, and the choice of subject matter was fairly wide. Three distinctive positions :

(1) 256-261: The meaning of the narratives is the state of affairs to which they refer : usually extramental state of affairs, but sometimes mental connected with extramental. For these proponents of ostensive meaning there were three options :

(i) (256-260): The supernaturalists, who took the narratives literally , even the miraculous ones. This corresponds to the authors' intention, which was literal. They were arguing on their opponents' grounds, for they were equating identity of intention and words with identity of intention and subject matter. The German word for literal, eigentlich , is ambiguous: it can mean that a series of words means literally rather than symbolically or allegorically, or that it meant by fulfilling the author's supposed intention to describe the external world. Johan Jakob Hess, the great enemy of the mythophiles, is an example. He notes the curious biblical combination of religion with narrated history. But one never knows when he uses "Geschichte" whether he means story or sequence of actual events. But why, asked the mythophiles, should we assume identity between the meaning of the words and the intention of the authors, seeing that the authors are of a mythological mind-set and the events so incredible?

(ii) (260-261): Naturalists, H.E.G. Paulus: The subject, and hence the meaning, of biblical narrative statements are the historically reconstructible, nonmiraculous occurrences that underlie the erroneous supernaturalistic reports . All those who wanted to insist on the moral aspects of Christianity without losing all hold on positivity favored this.

(iii) (261): The gospel narratives mean ostensively, but the real event to which they refer is a plot to deceive people . The intention of the evangelists is the very opposite of what they reported. (Reimarus).

(2) (261-266): The subject matter is not ostensive; it is the ideas or moral and religious truths (Gehalt) STATED in them in NARRATIVE FORM . They may be called idealists or rationalists.

T wo versions of this view :

(i) (261-262): The authors themselves contrived allegorical or mythical narratives to communicate ideal truths, as was the epoch's usage. For some the question of the occurrence of what is narrated is an error or simply beside the point.

(ii) (262-266): Kant among these, detached the allegorically shaped subject matter from the authors' intention, from the thought of their day, and from all inquiry into the possible occurrence. For Kant the meaning  is strictly a matter of understanding the ideas presented in story form, and this subject matter is the foundation and advancement of a pure moral disposition in the inner man and its connection with the ideal realm of ends , for the proper interpretation of the subject matter of the narrative must be in accordance with general canons of reason ( Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone ), independently of author's intention and historical situation. Kant became notorious; everybody opposed him. Frei does not see Kant as simply dissolving the unique biblical message into general, rational ideas, i.e. historical faith and salvation into a moral disposition, allegorically set forth in historical and ecclesiological terms. This is an oversimplification. Kant does not think that the authors clothed ideas in story form. On the contrary. For him the allegory involves a description of a stage-by-stage process, in which the stages of the narrative are paralleled by similar stages in the real subject matter to which the narrative points, and which we know independently of the narrative. In this way he gives an account of the process of conversion, of the transition form the possibility to the actual occurrence of faith.

(3) 264-266: The Mythophiles . The meaning is never ostensive, even when the tales accidentally render a degree of information about past occurrences. They also reject both variants of the allegorist position: The first dishonored the authors, Kant's ignored them and imported meaning into the Bible from the outside. The mythophiles rarely paid attention to the content of the myths. They saw the meaning neither in the events referred to nor in the ideas they represented, but in the consciousness they represented--an unconsciously mythologizing one .

266: Conclusion : The naturalists had to have recourse to ludicrous natural occurrences. The deception theory does not add up. The first variety of allegorists had no basis to support their unlikely hypothesis of the writers' intentions and their accommodation to the primitive level of their readers. Kant's dismissal of the intention and his abandonment of the historical context was too much for his contemporaries.

THE ECLIPSE OF BIBLICAL NARRATIVE

CHAPTER 14: MYTH AND NARRATIVE MEANING: A QUESTION OF CATEGORIES

"For orthodoxy, when it can no longer cling rigidly to the dogma of immediate inspiration, everything depends on a sure criterion for delimiting what should be understood literally in the Bible, and what mythically" (Harltlich and Sachs, Der Urspring des Mythosbegriffes , p. 59)

- 268: The basic hermeneutical issue was that of covering the gap between statements that appeared sufficiently history-like to be considered historical, and their real meaning if they were not.

- 269: The success of the mythical school lied in the alternative it furnished: texts mean without being ostensive nor yet allegorical: the mythical consciousness represented by the narrative text is its meaning; the genetic-psychological category of myth explains the produced myth. Between this and ostensive meaning of the literal sort the mythical school saw no cogent position. Hence the disjunctive and apparently ostensive alternative quoted in the epigraph.

- 269-70: BUT there seems to be an alternative which Hess was trying to adumbrate and to which Ernesti came the closest.

The alternative is that the narrative itself is the meaning of the text, that it refers to no other 'subject matter,' and that the meaning, to the extent that one thinks of it as at all distinct from the text, emerges cumulatively from the text itself . However, all hermeneuts (except Ernesti) would find this proposal unintelligible: for they would either mistake it for a suggestion concerning the ostensive character of the narratives, or they would ask how can one understand any description apart from the historical situation of the writer and of the historically conditioned character of his ideas and language. But if they are wrong, the dilemma of the epigraph dissolves, for it rests on the assumption that there must be an organic connection, if not identity, between literal meaning of the narratives and the literal-ostensive claim that they were accurate descriptions of external events .

- 270-72: The mythophiles were uneasy over the appropriate classification of, and assignation of meaning to, the narrative structure of the biblical stories (especially Genesis 1-3 and the Synoptics). Supposedly the mythophiles had the advantage over the rationalists of not explaining away the narrative structure as peripheral but of interpreting it. But their interpretation's effectiveness is doubtful. For all they acknowledged was that some myths were more history-like than others . For instance, Strauss found nothing like the history of the Gods. Thus, to include the biblical myths, he used as definitional the direct intercourse of the divine with men, especially men of heroic, almost divine stature. In fact Strauss identifies myth with the miraculous: "a happening in which the divine enters without mediation into the human, ideas manifest themselves without mediation in embodied form."  The meaning and content of the myth and its form of depiction, what is represented and the representation, are obviously separable things, though each is worthy of consideration.

- 272-73: Yet Strauss and the mythophiles were uncomfortable with their rendering irrelevant the greater history-likeness . For there is no intrinsic reason why a simple miracle--say, a raising from the dead with no details given--should be any more credible as an actual occurrence than an embellished miracle.

The heart of the matter is the question whether ancient narratives of doubtful ostensive value but realistic or history-like form , exemplifying a close relation between narrative form and meaning, no matter where they are found, can be unlocked by the one identical interpretive device of myth or by any other category separating the meaning from the depictive shape . The mythophiles should have been uncomfortable about their extension of general hermeneutics (and myth in particular) to the subject matter of texts, for it forced them to read the words in line with the subject matter postulated by their general hermeneutical device. It is at least possible that in regard to realistic narrative literature, the function of general hermeneutics should be formal rather than material; it should be confined to identifying a piece of literature as belonging to a particular genre rather than some other, rather than claim to interpret its meaning or subject matter . As for the latter task, due to the nature of this type of literature (whether biblical or not), there may be no single interpretive device to satisfy it. Every narrative in which story and meaning are closely related may have its own special hermeneutics . Such a distinction between general and special hermeneutics, corresponding to the distinction (in narratives) between genre specification and understanding of meaning has a certain affinity with Ernesti's distinction between words and subject matter.

- 273-74: The mythophiles noted that the gap between representation and what is represented, between narrative shape and meaning, is not so great in the simple history-like myths as in some others . Hence the difference they sensed between biblical narratives and other myths was not the same for them as the difference between historical fact and fiction, for all miraculous narratives are fictional . They had not category for dealing with the meaning of biblical narratives other than the disjunctive device that assigned either ostensive or mythical status to them. It was a case of category confusion: 'myth,' a genetic-psychological category, became confused with a literary-analytic device, and so had to do duty for both. As soon as a literary analysis loomed, indicating the distinction between biblical and other myths, it was immediately transformed (because it was thought to be part of it) into a historical analysis. The analysis of the history-likeness of the narratives was thought to be an analysis of their possible ostensive meaning, part of an assessment of their historical reliability .

- 274-76: Gabber and Baker found more history-like Genesis and other Old Testament stories. But Strauss is the most glaring case. He was vividly aware of the differences between biblical and other narratives, but proceeded to resolve them immediately by a reduction to the historical issue fact v fiction, and to the corresponding hermeneutical issue of literal-ostensive v mythical meaning or subject matter. He analyzed the differences as follows: (1) The biblical narratives are on a higher moral plane. BUT "An immoral history of the gods must be, but even the most moral may be, fiction." Thus he confused hermeneutical and historical issues as soon as he saw a distinctive literary genre . (2) The element of the weird is rare in the Bible compared to pagan myths; this shows that the latter are fiction, but not that the former is true. - Thus the distinction between the simple and history-like and the embellished and weird is there but irrelevant, because the two types of story mean in relation to the same subject matter, which must be either myth or fact. A difference in meaning that has nothing to do with the fact-fiction issue is lost . (3) Strauss claimed that the assertion that the Bible contains no myths finally rests on the difference between pagan myths, with their undignified, all too human gods, and Yaweh. Although Strauss hinted that the subject matter of the text was a distinct ideational content superior to pagan myths, in the context of the debate with the ostensivists he argued that the subject matter was the distinctively sensuous, preconceptual consciousness they express. Thus he failed to consider the significance for the meaning of those narratives of the fact that their characteristics as writings were quite different from other stories supposedly of the same sort , though he admitted that the classification of the latter as myths was easier than in the Bible's case.

277-78: Why this confusion of a hermeneutical with a historical issue? Because the mythical school, together with practically everybody else affirmed that  understanding the text's subject matter (Sache) has priority over understanding its words; the text's words have to be interpreted through the subject . Once this point is made, it is secondary whether the subject is historical events, the general consciousness of an era, a system of ideas, the author's intention, the inward moral experience of individuals, the structure of human existence, or some combination. In any case, the meaning of the text is not identical with the text . Had Strauss considered the narrative option seriously and explored the significance of the difference between the biblical and the mythical narratives, he would have had to face the possibility that the meaning of the gospel story is that very focus on the narrated enactment of the specific Messianiship of Jesus which he found actually incredible and therefore religiously impossible. In that case the gospels would have had to be declared not only historically but religiously anachronistic , and Strauss would not have been able to write the concluding apologetic sections of his book, about the God-man as the incarnation of the divine Idea in the human species as a whole and in its historically developing consciousness.

- 278-79: Back of all this, there was the theological preoccupation with "the positivity of revelation," i. e. the fact question, as well as the apologetic tendencies. In addition, "subject matter hermeneutics" was influenced by the identification of theory of meaning with theory of knowledge, which meant (among other things) that the sense of a fact-like statement was almost automatically turned into its ideal or, more likely, ostensive reference.

- 279-81: The assumption that not only, and not even in the first place, the grammatical or literal sense had to be understood by general canons of meaning, but also the subject matter was contested only by Ernesti, who claimed that the latter was not a hermeneutical issue. Now, whenever the subject and the words are severed, in order to be joined again thereafter by interpreting the words though the subject (to which general canons of logical as well as religious meaning are applicable), it will be very difficult to do justice to that form of writing in which the verbal form coheres with the meaning. Yet precisely this is the case in certain narratives, including some of the more important biblical narratives . The mythical school came close to discerning the distinctive quality of realistic narratives, but finally confused the claim to the intimate relation between the sense of a story and its narrative shape with the claim to the identity between sense of story and reliability and unreliability of its reports . This is understandable, for the parallel between history text and history-like text is evident, since in each case narrative form ad meaning are inseparable, precisely because in both cases meaning is in large part a function of the interaction of character and circumstances. One can say that the story is the meaning, or that the meaning emerges from the story form rather than being merely illustrated by it, as it would be the case in allegory and, in a different way, in myth. A great theme in literature of the novelistic type, like a pattern in a historical sequence, cannot be paraphrased by a general statement. The theme has meaning only to the extent that it is instantiated and hence narrated (not illustrated, as if it were an intellectually presubsisting or preconceived archetype, but constituted through the mutual, specific determination of agents, speech, social context, and circumstances that form the indispensable narrative web. The location of meaning in narrative of the realistic sort is the text, the narrative structure or sequence itself [AS IN AN ACTUALLY PLAYED PIECE OF THEATER?].

THE ECLIPSE OF BIBLICAL NARRATIVE

CHAPTER 15 : THE HERMENEUTICS OF UNDERSTANDING

- 282-284: The 19th century the meaning of the term "hermeneutics" changed from determination of the rules and principles of interpreting texts to an inquiry of understanding discourse and what is manifest in it . Theological hermeneutics enter as discussion of the relation between two types of understanding: critical understanding and understanding from the perspective of faith. The combination of the two perspectives was expected to yield the "essence" of Christianity.

Faith and its setting, not only in the practical context of life but within a general inquiry into the nature of man became a central preoccupation of theologians. Religious theory after Kant focused more and more on faith as a distinctive, sort of transcendental, self-conscious human stance irreducible to any other. It became a common place among 19th century protestant theologians that we know God only under the qualification of a religious relation to him (be it revelation or some other), not as he is in himself. Schleiermacher was te foremost proponent and shaped this stance into full theological system, for which every doctrine was normative only to the extent that it was a Glaubensaussage--a direct expression of faith or the living relation with God . He also pioneered in applying a parallel view to the interpretation of the Bible , to bring to bear on it the fruits of a general investigation of what is involved in understanding any instance of human speech and writing, in the ordinary and the religious reading of the Bible.

284-285: For different reasons formulated on p. 284, the paths explored by Schleirm for biblical hermeneutics were only lightly traveled until the end of the 19th. At the beginning of the 20th, kithe influence of Heidegger and Dilthey, of Bultmann and Barth reawakened interest in Schelier's hermeneutics. What happens to narrative meaning in the wake of this hermeneutics?

Schleiermacher, Hegel, and the Process of Understanding

- 288: Whatever is to be understood--past events, past culture in particular--is refracted through the interpreter's understanding. Thus hermeneutics now changes from the rules for interpreting texts to the theory of the process of knowing and understanding. The aim is to answer the question: What does  it mean to understand?

-= 288-290: Unlike Schelier, Hegel did not try to state the logic or structure of understanding by itself apart from its application. He wrote a phenomenology, calling it a rendering, or systematic study, or science of 'knowing in manifestation ( Darstellung des erscheinenden Wissens, Wissenschaft des escheinenden Wissen ).

For him Wissen was nearly equivalent to Schleier's Verstehen . Schleier denied the possibility of a universal philosophy because there is no universal language, but he affirmed the possibility and necessity of a separate, comprehensive theory of understanding. By contrast, for Hegel, hermeneutics separable from the full-fledged philosophical enterprise of the investigation of knowing and being was impossible, for knowing or understanding not only takes place only in application to a subject matter (Schleier agrees) but is itself intelligible only in application . The reason for this is that understanding is for Hegel in constant motion or transition, changing reciprocally with its changing, contingent content or objects, of which one must say that they are given to and shape understanding, and yet are shaped by and are, therefore, the product of understanding. This process is an instance of the pervasive motion which Hegel calls mediation or dialectic. When it is seen as such, at the end of the phenomenological depiction, the subject-object duality between knowing and what is known will be seen as a duality internal to Spirit itself, rather than a state of everlasting heterogeneity. And then, of course the duality is seen in its own transcendence. Then, and only then, can one really know what it means to know or understand, inseparably from its application. Hence the last words of the Phenomenology .

Schleiermacher's Hermeneutics

- 290: Schleier believed that one may take a given discourse from the past or the present, indifferently, and reproduce the original in such a way that far from being a merely mechanical copy  it is in the very act of reproduction, penetrated by the interpreter's understanding. The original and the interpreter are present to each other in a mutual fitness or homogeneity.

- 291: What is to be understood is the author in and as his self-expression, but the author as expressed in his verbal artifact, and as an individual focus of a common linguistic and cultural stock as well as the self-expression of individual self-developing spirit.

- 292: The hermeneutical procedure is more artistic than scientific, for it involves two moments: (1) the grammatical moment, directed toward understanding the discourse within a language as a whole, and (2) the psychological directed toward understanding the discourse as a fact in the thinker. There is no recipe: a certain oscillation between the two moments has to take place.

- 293: Discourse and understanding are made for each other. Every discourse is the external aspect of thinking; and the act of understanding is a reversal of an act of discourse,

"in that there must come into consciousness the thought that was at the base of discourse." There is a divinatory procedure in the psychological aspect of hermeneutical art.

- 294: The hermeneutical task is that of "understanding the discourse first as well and then better than its originator." The reason is that much of what the interpreter wants to understand about the genesis and development of a project must remain unconscious to its author, except to the extent that he becomes his own reader (or his own interpreter?). and in that role the author is in no privileged position.

- 295: Schleier never exaggerated the psychological understanding: if one understands discourse by understanding its author, no thought is accessible except in speech, and speech is seen as a product of a common language and culture.

Schleiermacher and Schelling: A possible Parallel

- 296-7: Schleier, unlike Schelling, laid no claim to a transcendence of the subject-object duality. In this respect he was on Kant's side. Schleier had two subjects: the author and the interpreter. There can be no unity between these two perspectives, even when an author becomes his own interpreter. Artful discourse, being aesthetic, remains incompletely intellectual and not fully transparent to its author. As for the interpreter, he replicates the original act in conscious, intellective fashion, including a moment of intellectual divination. So he more than the author comes to understand the artful product in its origin and development, without losing however his own individuality and subjectivity.

Understanding and Change in Hermeneutics

- 301: Schleier spoke little of the theme, idea, or explicative sense ( Sinn ) of the discourse., because for him interpretation was the reconstruction of the process of discourse by that of understanding. By contrast, the debate over the relation between the author's intention, or even his words, and the actual subject matter of a work presupposes that the significant unity of a work in its finished structure, to be seen quite apart from its genesis and development.

- 303-304: For the thinkers before Schleier, understanding and explication were distinguishable, but inseparable and equally important.. Explication was the appropriate reproduction of the work as given, determinate structure. Application was a different matter because it is concerned with the significance, and possibly with the authority of the text in a context other than the original. Application becomes a significant hermeneutical issue only when the sense of time difference between the original and present time becomes an acute issue for a consciousness conceiving itself as possessing a uniquely present location. Moreover, this sense of being at present has to be joined to an ambiguity concerning meaning. Where 'meaning' hovers between the explicative sense of a work and its significance for somebody, application becomes an important part of hermeneutics. Precisely this ambiguity, together with the sense of present location and of the difference between then and now, was developed in the hermeneutics of understanding, in contrast to the older procedure for which temporal perspective mattered little but the distraction between explicative and applicative sense was clear and pronounced .

- 304: The older interpreters distinguishing between explication and application had tended to assign the latter to a secondary place. On the other hand they had not emphasized vigorously the distinction between understanding and explicating a work. The two activities form one common undertaking. If anything, subtilitas explicandi corresponded to the text even more than subtilitas intelligendi. It is, in fact, the focal aspect of interpretation, rendering as it does the fixed structure of meaning corresponding to the structure of the text itself.

-306: After Schleier, the convergence of understanding and application (??), the recession of subject matter explication are but technical expressions of this transformation. In hermeneutics, there was no going back to the precritical stance, for which the understanding process itself had no contribution to make to the object to be interpreted or to the interpretive results but was simply a picture of a normative subject matter.

THE ECLIPSE OF BIBLICAL NARRATIVE

CHAPTER 16: "UNDERSTANDING" AND NARRATIVE CONTINUITY

- 307: The essential point did not change with Schleiermacher: for him, no less than for his predecessors, the sense or meaning of a narrative could in no way be either the narrative itself or its descriptive shape or its narrative structure.

- 310-312: Where is the unity and continuity of a narrative to be found, according to Schleier? Not in the narrative sequence of character and incident shaping each other through their interaction , but in consciousness in at least a twofold sense: (a) the author's consciousness, his unitary intuition, and (b) the consciousness of the chief character in the narrative: in the gospels, it was the pervasive presence and effusion of Jesus' consciousness that communicates itself to their authors. Schleier preferred John to the Synoptics because of the biographical unity of his gospel by contrast to the disjunctive character of different similar matters in the Synoptics. This location of narrative continuity in consciousness precluded locating it in the interaction of character, context, and circumstance . The perspective for which narrative meaning is identical with the dynamics of its descriptive shape--for which the characters, their social context, the circumstances or incidents and the theme or themes are all interdependent --was as impossible for Schleier' hermeneutics of understanding as for the earlier hermeneutical writers.

Consciousness and Narrative: The Gospels

- 313-316: Schleier held that Jesus underwent only a Scheintod . What is remarkable is not Schleier's disbelief in the resurrection, for skepticism about physical miracles is a modern attitude, but that it never occurred to him that there is something unfitting, even ludicrous, in making such a thunderous anticlimax possible. But Schleier is consistent: it is possible if the crucial continuity of the story (and hence by derivation of the crucial historical facts too) lies in the inner being of Jesus--his consciousness as manifest in a connected pattern . In that case the traditional climatic occurrences of the story become more or less irrelevant. Why not alter the end of the story about the presumably historical basis of which we have such confusing information but which one hopes to make historically more credible than in its unrevised form? At least Schleier was more consistent than others who attributed the meaning of the story to Jesus' self-consciousness and nonetheless accepted the death in the cross as historical, for this was not an element of Jesus's consciousness and implied that an element quite heterogeneous to the character or consciousness of Jesus formed part of the unity of the story . And then they also had the problem of the resurrection, which could far less than the death in the cross be homogeneous with Jesus' consciousness . So they maintained that the whole of Jesus' self-manifestation is the manifestation of God. But then the story's unity depends on the consciousness of a new character, God. Here Bultmann is to be placed. Schleier was more consistent who maintained that the personal dignity of Jesus as redeemer is known quite apart from the occurrence or non-occurrence of the resurrection.

- 316-318: Unlike Schleier, Hegel  did not have to worry about the confluence of historical fact claims with the meaning of the gospel narrative. Whether (as seems more likely) his left-wing followers were right that the revelation was never more for him than the sensuous representation of the idea of reconciliation, or whether his right-wing followers were right that he believed the positive event embodies an actual and indispensable stage on the way to the full self-realization of truth--he had no apologetical stake in the notion. For that reason he could do greater justice than Schleier to the

narrative shape of the biblical stories, casting aside the ultimacy of narrated occurrence as historical revelation. Moreover he always considered Xtianity as the crucial historical exemplification of the fact that truth must be seen in specific, contingent, and representational form . Unlike Schleier but like Hereder, he could take seriously the accounts of creation and the fall in Genesis, and of the death-resurrection sequence as the focus and climax of the gospel story. As is clear from his Phenomenology , objective elements such as putative occurrences bear an absolutely essential formative relation to the receiving and shaping consciousness. However, for him, the continuity of a story which provides its intelligibility was not the interaction of character and incident, i.e. the realistic narrative shape. It was, rather, the integration of the consciousness-event interaction into the history of consciousness, or the stages by which spirit becomes himself. The story of the death and resurrection of Xt marks the transition of Spirit from the stage of individual consciousness to that of general consciousness. For Hegel, meaning is the framework into which the interaction of incident and character is taken up, so that the interaction may be seen to be more than a contingent external relation. And that framework, at the phenomenological or interpretive rather than the ontological level, is that of consciousness or knowing. The narrative sequence of Jesus' death and resurrection is finally both a stage of transition in the process of consciousness and a representational picture, i.e. a mythical or historical representation, for consciousness. Since both myth and history are representational, Hegel did not have to worry, as Xtian theologians and Strauss did, over harmonizing historical judgments with interpretive judgments about the meaning of the putative facts.

CONCLUSION: The hermeneutics of understanding--be it Schleier's individual understanding penetrating the 'thou' meeting him in discourse, or Hegel's pheneomenological procedure, ranging contingent positive occurrences together with consciousness into the horizon of Spirit --simply cannot deal with narrative continuity, and narrative meaning as a function of the continuity.

- 318-324: There is no need to assume the normativeness of the model, selected for hermeneutical purposes, of the nonobjectifiable subject and its public ingredience in (either objectified or nonobjectified) speech and event . The model tends to break into its two component parts, grammatical analysis of the text and psychological analysis. If another model functions better--a model in which the human situation ius characterized by intentional agency ingredient in external, 'objective,' contingent circumstances and social contexts and is, in its turn, shaped by them, why should one not choose that model for the understanding of narrative texts, and perhaps even texts of another sort?

321: But this was not possible or envisaged for those who followed the hermeneutics of understanding ( except perhaps for the Marxist revision of the Hegelian version  of the scheme into a form of historical and narrative realism: See note on p. 321) .

322-24: The whole procedure of 'understanding' undercuts realistic narrative. As soon as 'understanding' sets the terms on which the text is to be interpreted, the meaning of the text is bound to be similar to the structure of understanding of 'linguisticality' or some other special structure of human self-and-other-apprehension. What this does to narratives we saw in the instance of Schleier on the death and resurrection. Whatever cannot be ranged into the structure becomes meaningless. And yet, precisely, the history-likeness (the direct interaction of character, descriptively communicative words, social context and circumstance, whether miraculous or not ) in which descriptive shape and meaning cohere, was, by common agreement, a distinguishing characteristic of much biblical narrative .

323-324: Before, the scholars had been confident that the text is directly accessible , and therefore a science of interpretation is no more than a codification of the principles and rules of procedure. The later commentators stood in the shadow of Kant's Copernican revolution. The upshot was that the focus of inquiry became the unitary structure of understanding rather than the written text as such. There was an increasing uneasy that the meaning is not truly present to the interpretive procedure, that there might be a gap between the interpreting 'subject' and what can be known of a meaning of a text from the past . The endeavor to bridge the gap and gain a normative interpretation of texts--one that would do justice both to technical philological and  historical critical work, and to broader human reading--became increasingly frequent, complex, and uneasy, particularly in the study of biblical narratives. The fate of a narrative reading of biblical stories remained unbroken from the days of Deism through the first third of the nineteenth. The realistic reading of the Bible, of the gospels in particular, went into eclipse throughout the period. Whether anything has changed since Hegel's days is a question for another day.

\wp\monas\eclipse May 8, 1995

THREE YEARS MORE BEFORE RETIRING, UNTIL JULY 98

1995-1996:

My salary: 53.000.00 Increase in pension  =  20,000.00

G' salary:  8,000.00 Total accumulation   = 310,000.00

SS:         14,700.00 Increase minus taxes =  10,700.00

          75,700.00 Increase in savings  =   5,000.00

  

- 1996-1997:

My salary: 54,000.00   - Increase in pension  =  20,000.00

G' salary:  8,000.00   - Total accumulation   = 330,000.00

SS:         16,000.00   - Increase minus taxes =  12,000.00

78,000.00   - Increase in savings  =   6,000.00

Plus withdrawals from Tax Sheltered Saving mandated by law

- 1997-1998: RETIREMENT IN JUNE

My salary: 27,000.00   - Increase in pension  =  10,000.00

G' salary:  8,000.00   - Total accumulation   = 340,000.00

SS: 16,000.00   - Increase minus taxes =  12,000.00

Pension:    13,500.00   - Increase in savings  =   3,000.00

64,500.00

Plus withdrawals...

- 1999 and on:

Pension:   27,000.00   - Total savings =  50,000.00

My SS:     16,000.00   - Taxable = 32,000.00 =    5,000.00 G's SS:*    4,610.00   - (75% of my primary, reduced by Investmts: 3,000.00 1,100, but more than compensated by 50,610.00 increased pension + investments)

  - Net income = 39,000.00

* G starts receiving SS in January 1999, at her age 62, at 75% of what would be half of my primary SS.

N. B. In the above calculations I did not include, either as income or as taxable income, the money we have by law to withdraw from our tax-sheltered accounts. At any rate, the idea is to reinvest that money after having paid the tax.
