---
title: "92-SEP-3"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/92-SEP-3"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.0
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\chantill\sept92-2 September 22, 92

Dramatic Understanding and Faith

For Aristotle,"the appropriate criterion of correct choice is a thoroughly human being, the person of practical wisdom" (Nussbaum, Fragility , p. 290). [But who is that person if not the person who makes correct decisions according to Aris's personal judgment? In other words, the "we" of Aristotle is the "we" of a particular ethos, that is, it is 'ideological,' as we would say today. Nussbaum acknowledges the circularity: "These apparent circularities will concern us towards the end of this chapter" (Ibid. p. 291). She also acknowledges the ideologicality, to an extent: it is what is good for human beings: "...ethics is anthropocentric in a stronger sense as well" (Ibid.). But she believes that what is good for human beings is what is good for human beings as she understands them. In other words, her "we" is as particular as Aristotle's, though different. Her ideologicality is hidden by her covering herself with the mantle of what is human. This becomes evident in her commentary on After Virtue in the NYRB, though there is at least some indication of her awareness of the particularity of her own understanding by contrast to the particularity of McIntyre's supposedly inhuman understanding]. Supposedly, this person of practical wisdom regulates his/her conduct by reference to rules of thumb (rather than strict universals) applied wisely to the particular case. In this sense, this thoroughly human being is a knower, though he does not possess the exact, scientific knowledge represented by the episteme of the Posterior Analytics . My question is: Does this person really do that, or is it only the one who reflects on that person who attributes to the person the knowledge constituted by the rule of thumb? [CHRISTIAN WISDOM, PAGAN WISDOM, ETC.].
