---
title: "99-nov-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1999/99-nov-1.wpd"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v2.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

99-nov-1 Barth et la connaissance de Dieu

                                      (Cf . Delhougne, pp. 529-539)

99-nov-1, REVISED ON JUNE 7, 2000.

Summary : Barth is a biblical believer who misunderstands himself as a Kantian concerning knowledge and its objectivity. Hence, in order to insure the reality of the God in whom he believes he, quite inconsistently with his biblical faith, interprets it in terms of Kantian objectivity.

“... le niveau d’immanence ou se situe toute la demarche philosophique” (Delhougne, p. 533). [ANY CONCEPTION OF KNOWLEDGE AS CORRESPONDENCE BEGINS WITHIN IMMANENCE].

“Ces remarques tres sommaires montrent que l’objectivite dont il est question dans la connaissance de Dieu est totalement differente de celle de la perception, qui etait pour Kant le type de la connaissance objective . Une question est donc laissee sans reponse par le barthisme: quelle est la nature de l’objectivite qu’il attribue a la connaissance de Dieu par la foi, et surtout, quelle en est la valeur epistemologique? Nous touchons ici une insuffisance de cette theologie ” (Ibid., p. 571) [NB: KANT’S MODEL OF KNOWLEDGE AND ITS OBJECTIVITY IS VISUAL. ONLY THAT CAN BE KNOWN THAT CAN BE INTUITED, THAT IS, PERCEIVED IN SPACE AND TIME; HENCE GOD IS NOT POSSIBLE OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE, BUT NEITHER IS THE SUBJECT AS SUBJECT. [SARTRE, SUPPOSEDLY, WILL MAKE THE SUBJECT AS SUBJECT OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE (ABSOLUTE CERTITUDE), WHICH IS A CONTRADICTION IN TERMS]. THUS THE TRADITIONAL NOTION OF KNOWLEDGE AND ITS OBJECTIVITY UNDERPINNED BY THE VISUAL MODEL DOESN’T ONLY CREATE PROBLEMS CONCERNING THE REALITY OF GOD. WHAT IS PROBLEMATIC IS THE VERY NOTION OF KNOWLEDGE AS VISUAL CORRESPONDENCE]

“The assumption that the Middle Ages represents a time when Christians ‘got it right’ not only does an injustice to the complexity of the times and places so named, but betrays the Gospel requirement that even in a world that understands itself to be Christian, faithful witness is no less required for the truth that is Christ to be known. When Christianity is tempted to become a civilizational religion in a manner that makes witness secondary to knowing the truth about God, [WHICH IS WHAT THE MARRIAGE BETWEEN JERUSALEM AND ATHENS INVOLVED], Christians lose the skills necessary to make known to themselves and others how what we believe is true to the way things are . The very attempt to tell the story of modernity as one of decline from a Christian world ironically underwrites the assumption that the story that Christianity is actually is inseparable from the story of the Western culture” (S. Hauerwas, Glifford Lectures 2001, ch. 1).

I sense an internal conflict in Barth’s views on our knowledge of God, in that he tries to marry the biblical notion of God’s revelation with the Kantian notion of objectivity.. On the one hand, Barth applies to our knowledge of God Kant’s notion of objectivity. The reason for this is that Barth doesn’t see any other way of affirming God’s existence: if God exists, God is objective, that is, object of knowledge, not of sentiment or desire -- “ Objekt ,” not “ Gegenstand ” in Feuerbach’s idiolect-- for otherwise God would be a mere affection of the subject. For Kant, as for Feuerbach, genuine knowledge is, by definition, objective, that is, has as its noetic correlate a known object, which excludes feeling or sentiment. Indeed, sentiment is blind in the sense of having no object, of not referring to object. (As explained by Delhougne, for Kant “Le sentiment ne contient que la maniere don’t le sujet est affecte quant a son plaisir ou deplaisir”, p. 525). So far, then, Barth apears to be Kantian in his conception of objectivity, though of course, unlike Barth, Kant would deny that God is objective, object of knowledge. On the other hand, however, Barth understands God’s revelation in the biblical way, that is, as an encounter with God who makes himself effectively accessible to us by choosing to encounter us, as “an event” that happens to human beings and by which they are affected. Now, as we shall see, in Kant’s epistemology there is no room for events, for events are neither subjective like sentiments nor objective like facts. In short, in my opinion,  Barth makes an impossible mixture of the Kantian conception of knowledge as objective and of the Biblical notion of revelation as a historical encounter between God and the human being, without realizing that these two conceptions belong in different and incompatible universes of discourse.   

Concerning the Kantian aspect of Barth’s view of knowledge , Barth agrees with Kant in seeing knowledge as purely objective, that is, uncontaminated by desire and independent from action :

(1) Le Gegenstand est ce que l’homme desire [object of desire, wishful thinking]; l’ Objekt est ce que l’homme connait [object of knowledge, realite connue]. Le Gegenstand est ce que nous cherchons a atteindre par notre action; l’ Objekt est la chose elle-meme, telle qu’elle est, abstraction faite de notre desir . Or... la these de Feuerbach consistait a dire que Dieu etait seulement Gegendstand et non Objekt . C’etait reduire Dieu a n’etre que la coloration d’un sentiment humain, lui enlever toute existence reelle independante, le nier comme Dieu, en faire un attribut de l’homme. A l’exact oppose de Feuerbach, Barth pretendra que Dieu existe independamment du sentiment humain, qu’il est distinct de l’homme, que nous avons de lui une connaissance objective, en ce sens qu’il nous apparait comme un Objekt , distinct de nous (pp. 536-7).

Feuerbach, like Kant, takes desire for a mere affection of the subject, without noetic or cognitive correlate. Thus, in affirming that God is object of desire, Gegenstand, Feuerbach is implicitly denying that God is actually exists. Now, since Barth wants to affirm that God actually exists, he has no other alternative, given the notion of knowledge and reality he shares with Fuerbach and Kant, than to affirm that God is Objekt, for otherwise God would either be a mere affection of the subject, as Feuerbach claims, or God would be unknowable, as Kant claims.

(2) Precisons que, quoique objective, la connaissance de Dieu n’atteint pas l’objet en soi. Sur ce point, Barth reste fidele a la perspective critique: Dieu n’est pas connu en dehors de l’acte par lequel il est connu. Cet apparent truisme revient a dire que, meme dans la connaissance de Dieu qu’il veut vraiment objective, Barth ne verse pas dans le dogmatisme (epistemologique) qui lui ferait affirmer qu’il y a connaissance de l’en soi de Dieu (objet au sens D de Lalande). Au contraire, Barth ecrit: ‘Ce n’est pas en lui-meme que Dieu devient objet de connaissance selon la Bible, mais c’est au moment ou il se revele ; et de meme ce n’est pas dans l’existence de son oeuvre comme telle qu’il parle, mais par ce qu’il fait dans et par son oeuvre’ (p. 536).

This text (2) reflects Delhougne’s understanding of Barth as Kantian, for Delhougne thinks that Bart is talking of the impossibility of knowing God as a Kantian thing in itself. I don’t think that is the case, however. When Barth speaks in this text of the knowledge of God according to the Bible (“selon la Bible”) he has shifted from the Kantian to the biblical universe of discourse, where there is no room for such Kantian notions as the thing in itself and its consequent unknowability. However, Barth himself doesn’t quite realize his own shift, for as a believer he is certain of God’s existence and as an epistemologist he has no alternative to the Kantian epistemology. So Barth thinks that the Bible presupposes Kant’s epistemology, excepting what concerns God’s objectivity. Hence Delhougne’s very understandable confusion.

To begin with, Delhougne’s interpretation of Kant is certainly wrongheaded , for Kant denies that God can be known –period–, not simply that God can be known in itself, as Delhougne’s text suggests. Actually, Kant’s denial of the possibility of knowing the thing in itself does not and cannot apply to God, for it applies only to objects of knowledge, and for Kant God is not a possible object of knowledge. Indeed, the First Critique  involves a forceful denial of the very possibility of knowing God because God is a mere idea of reason. Hence the need for the Second Critique , where God is not object of knowledge but, so to say, object of rational faith, of a necessary (hence rational) postulation of practical reason (hence not object of knowledge but of faith).

Secondly, Delhougne’s interpretation of Barth is wrong . Unlike Kant, Barth thinks that God can be known through divine revelation through  faith. As acknowledged by Delhougne in text (1), Barth thinks that God is objective, “ Objekt ,” that is, independent from, and irreducible to, the act by which He is known. Now, the affirmation of the independent existence of anything amounts to what Kant calls dogmatism . Thus, contrary to what Delhougne claims here,  from Kant’s perspective, Barth “tombe dans le dogmatisme epistemologique.”

Yet, Delhougne has an excuse for misinterpreting Barth, precisely because Barth is not a consistent Kantian but a biblical believer who misunderstands himself as a Kantian concerning the objectivity of knowledge. When Barth refers to the knowledge of God according to the Bible as an event in which God participates as self-revealing and man as accepting God by responding to Him, Barth is thinking in biblical categories which are incompatible with Kant’s views, as we shall see in the following texts. Indeed, the Kantian categories of immanent and transcendent, of phenomenal  and noumenal, of objective and subjective don’t apply to “event.” Indeed, as implied by the next quoted text, these categories belong in the philosophical universe of discourse that begins within immanence,  whereas the biblical universe of discourse doesn’t begin within immanence.    

(3) ... il veut empecher que l’on n’assimile la foi a une ‘experience religieuse’ du type sentimental [WHICH IS THE ONLY ALTERNATIVE THE KANTIAN BARTH SEES: EITHER GOD IS OBJECT OR GEGENSTAND]. . D’autre part, notre theologien parle d’ ”evenement”, et d’evenement “absolument unique dans la serie des autres connaissances”. Or un evenement ne se deduit pas: il advient. Sa singularite meme fait qu’il ne peut etre construit par la raison en tant que faculte de l’universel. Mais il est raisonnable d’accueillir l’evenement et de le reconnaitre. Cette reconnaisssance se fait dans l’acte meme de l’accueil. Les precautions critiques, necessairement a posteriori , ne seront toujours que des regards d’archeologues. Un acte de connaissance ne se construit pas, il se vit... Comme l’ecrit Eric Weil, ‘il [l’homme] ne peut pas s’empecher de vouloir connaitre la ou, legitimement, il ne peut que penser’. Faut-il dire que Barth a cede a ce penchant irresistible? C’EUT ETE LE CAS S’IL ETAIT PARTI DU NIVEAU D’IMMANENCE OU SE SITUE TOUTE LA DEMARCHE PHILOSOPHIQUE en quete de Dieu. MAIS EN INTRODUISANT LA CATEGORIE D’EVENEMENT, C’EST-A-DIRE –FINALEMENT– D’EXTERIORITE, D’ACTION EN DEHORS DE L’IMMANENC E , IL RETABLIT LA LEGITIMITE DE CETTE CONNAISSANCE. On peut –bien mieux, on doit– alors parler de connaissance de Dieu, parce que, dans l’originaire de la communaute croyante, il y a UN DONNE, OU PLUS EXACTEMENT, UN ‘RECU,’ UNE SECOUSSE venue du dehors, don’t on ne peut ne pas tenir compte parce que cela est” (pp. 533-534)

The philosophical tradition –what Delhougne calls “la demarche philosophique”-- is essentially reflective and contemplative rather than direct and participatory, for, starting with Socrates and Plato, it began as an attempt to criticize what was taken for knowledge, to separate “knowledge” from “opinion.”  People believe that they know, but whether what they take for knowledge is really knowledge or mere subjective belief, that is “opinion,” is what behooves philosophers to determine. Now, in order to determine that, the philosophical thinker at the point of departure has to place himself or herself, at least methodologically, in a sort of immanent solipsism, as Descartes explicitly did. This is what Delhougne alludes to by saying that the philosophical approach begins on the level of immanence. Now, while Kant definitely situates himself within the philosophical tradition and begins on the level of immanence, Barth’s point of departure is different, as remarked by Delhougne. Indeed, there is no moment at which Barth will suspend, even methodologically, his belief in God. This is not due, however, to dogmatism or to a capricious refusal on Barth’s part to take the critical stance, but to the fact that Barth’s point of departure doesn’t necessitate the passage from immanence to transcendence because Barth doesn’t begin on the level of immanence.

But how does Barth avoid the level of immanence without falling into dogmatism?

THE BIBLE, FROM WHICH BARTH TAKES HIS BEARINGS CONCERNING THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD, IS NOT A CRITICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL WORK (cf. Apendix). It doesn’t begin with a solitary, fleshless mind or self  in search of genuine knowledge. It begins with the event of God’s entering human history, making Himself present to people, happening to them, and with people involved in the event by responding to God.. An event, however,  is not something that appears to an incorporeal, a-historical subject as a Kantian phenomenon does, but something that happens to concrete human beings in particular historical circumstances, which implies that they are in the world and are exposed to what surrounds them. In short, someone, like Barth, who has been encountered by God, someone to whom God has happened, cannot possibly take, and doesn’t need to take, the philosophical stance.

The Kantian categories don’t apply here. Within the Kantian universe of discourse there is absolutely no room for what Barth is talking about (as, correlatively, there is no room for what Kant is talking about within the biblical, Barthian universe of discourse). Indeed, an event  is neither immanent nor transcendent, for the human being is not a contemplator of it to whom the event appears phenomenally, but is involved in it in flesh and bones.  Consequently, an event is neither purely objective as a fact, as a Kantian object of knowledge is, nor merely subjective, as a sentiment . Another way of saying the same: the encounter in which God reveals Himself and in which the human being falls on his or her knees before Him in adoration is neither subjective nor objective in Kant’s sense, both because the Kantian epistemic subject has no knees to fall on (anymore than Descartes’ “thinking thing” has knees to fall on), and because in Kant’s perspective there is no connection between knowledge and action, between the grasping of an object in the detached way characteristic of the objectivity of knowledge and the action of responding to it, between being shaken by God’s presence and  falling in adoration before Him .

The solipsistic subject or self  is an invention of philosophers. This invention becomes unavoidable once the critical stance is assumed, that is, once the task of philosophy is conceived as separating opinion or mere belief from knowledge. For then knowledge is unavoidably seen as  something in the mind corresponding to what is out of the mind, which in its turn requires the passage  --acknowledged by Kant as impossible– from the subject’s immanence to the transcendent thing in itself. However,  if ‘knowledge’ as the trace left by an event arises out of an event, as in the biblical conception, the knower does not have to transcend his immanence because, as a vulnerable subject to which things happen, the subject is never beyond the effective reach of what surrounds him, of the other than himself.  And thus, as when one is slapped on the face one knows-acknowledges the slapper in the very passion of being slapped by the slapper’s action and in the very action of responding to the slapper, so, in Barth’s un-Kantian, biblical  conception of the knowledge of God, “cette reconnaissance se fait dans l’acte meme de l’acceuil” (texte 3), that is, in the event itself of being encountered by God and of responding to Him. This is what Delhougne means by  “un recu, une secousse venue du dehors, don’t on ne peut ne pas tenir compte parce que cela est” (texte 3). It is in this connection, totally alien to the unknowability of the thing in itself, that what Barth says in text (3) about the impossibility of knowing God otherwise than through the act in which he reveals himself becomes meaningful. As one cannot know as a slapper the person by whom one is slapped but through the  passion of being slapped and the action of responding to him as a slapper, so one cannot know God as self-revealing but through the shattering event of being encountered by Him and responding to Him as God. And once this happens, the critical precautions are useless for they come too late to certify a knowledge that cannot be denied; they represent the archeologists’ approach .*

* For Kant sentiment or feeling is a merely subjective feeling without cognitive value, for it has no object. Thus there is no room in Kant for the cognitive value of the event.  Indeed, the event of being slapped is neither a mere subjective feeling nor a purely objective, detached knowledge of fact. When I am slapped I certainly feel, but in this case my feeling is not self contained, like pain; it is  feeling the slapper who slaps me, and in this sense it has gnoseological value. On the other hand, the knowledge herein involved  is not purely objective or merely factual grasp of object –the only sort of knowledge recognized by Kant– for Kant’s objectivity  involves no feeling at all. Thus, the event of being slapped which happens to me and in which I am involved as recipient and respondent and in which the slapper is involved as the initiator entails a ‘cognitive’ value of a type that completely escaped Kant.  

But why did it escape Kant? Because Kant is a philosopher.  Thus, his stance is not direct and participatory , as is the agent’s stance, who is involved in coping with the world to which he or she is exposed, but reflective and contemplative , because it is a critical stance. Kant’s business is to criticize what is supposedly known, in order to find whether it is genuinely known or merely believed. Hence Kant will take what appears for a mere appearance, for a phenomenon, until he is satisfied that it indeed  is objective, “Objekt.”   This is to say that Kant, as a philosopher, is a mere contemplator, at first of the phenomenon and then of the object known. The agent, however, is no contemplator of what happens to him or her. In the event of being slapped, the slapper doesn’t appear to the agent as a phenomenon at any point, nor is the slapper known in a detached way as a fact at any point. Either the event happens to the agent, or it is not an event. Before something that ‘appears’ (notice the purely visual rather than effective perspective) one can take the critical stance in order to find out whether it is objective or not, but being slapped is not something that appears visually to the person slapped, nor is being slapped by a slapper a purely objective fact for the person slapped. To the slapper one doesn’t react by affirming or denying; rather, one responds effectively. And the response to the slapper is the practical acknowledgement of the slapper by the slapped.     

(4 )”Il est bien clair que... tout, meme un sujet, peut devenir l’objet d’un discours. Ou bien faudrait-il dire que le discours trahit necessairement son objet reel? C’est ce que semble affirmer la phrase de Simone Weil a propos de Dieu: ‘Celui qui croit parler sur Dieu, ce n’est pas de Dieu qu’il parle”. A notre avis, cela ne serait vrai que si ce discours ne s’enracinait pas dans une connaissance effective de Dieu. Mais si l’on a une telle conaissance (par la foi), alors le discours sur Dieu devient possible. C’est en ce sens que nous interpretons la phrase suivante de Barth: ‘Toute pensee sur Dieu doit commencer en pensant a Dieu.  C’est dire, en d’autres termes, ce que nous avons cherche a montrer a la suite de Barth dans les pages qui precedent: pour etre siginifiant et vrai, le discours du croyant, du theologien, doit presupposer une connaissance effective, et meme objective, de Dieu (p. 539).

In my opinion, Simone Weil has a point that Delhougne fails to recognize. If one goes along with Kant’s view of knowledge as objective , as Barth and Delhougne and Simone Weil herself do at least some of the time, then her argument is ad hominem and valid. Indeed, given Kant’s notion of objectivity, there is no possible discourse about God, for such discourse would at best refer to God as Objekt , and such God would at best be a mere fact to be assented to in a detached manner, not a loving God to be responded to with adoration. This is why Heidegger rightly rejected “the God of metaphysics, the God  of philosophers,” because before such a God one “can neither fall on one’s knees nor sing and dance.”  Thus, pace Delhougne, the objective discourse does indeed betray the God who happens to us, the biblical God. On the other hand, insofar as Barth’s biblical God (which is also Delhougne’s and Weil’s God) is not objective in Kant’s sense, He can be spoken of or referred to,  but only by those who have been involved in the event of encountering Him, precisely because this discourse refers to the God encountered, not to a God-fact. In other words, the discourse of prayer and adoration in which one speaks with God and addresses him in the vocative has to precede the discourse in which one speaks about God in the indicative mode for the latter discourse to be meaningful. This is what the end of Delhougne’s quoted text suggests.

Unfortunately, Delhougne is as confused as Barth concerning the philosophical and the biblical universes of discourse . Hence Delhougne claims that the believer’s discourse presupposes both an effective knowledge of God, which refers to the God really encountered in the event of His revelation, as well as an objective knowledge of God, which refers to the incompatible Kantian idea of objectivity.

To clarify this a little more. What Kant means by Objekt is object of a true judgment. If such judgment were verbalized  it would consist, concretely, in a statement expressing the assent of the judging subject to the judged object because of its intuitive character. Thus, what Kant calls  object is exclusively object of assent . In that case, the only conceivable relationship of the knower to the known is as object of assent, which excludes all sentiment or desire. An event, however, is not something assented to or to be assented to, but something that happens to the subject and that can only be recognized in and through its happening (and later be referred to on the basis of its having happened to the subject). Now, since  revelation is not an object of assent but an event, when verbalized reflectively it does not result in a statement expressing assent but in a dramatic narrative in which God shows Himself by doing something that affects the human beings involved and in which these human beings show their recognition of God by responding to Him effectively, not by assenting. Thus, to take a concrete example, God did not reveal Himself to Abraham by stating something about Himself to which Abraham could and should assent, but by commanding to Abraham to sacrifice Isaac. Nor did Abraham respond to God by assenting, for God had stated nothing to be assented to, but by taking Isaac to the mountain to sacrifice him.  The narrative, though, doesn’t stop there because the event in which God and Abraham were involved did not stop there; rather Abraham’s arm was stopped by God’s angel when he was about to sacrifice Isaac; and, in response to God’s command, Abraham joyfully offered Yaweh an animal in sacrifice. This is not a God objective- fact, but  a God-subject to be obeyed unconditionally, and feared and loved, and Abraham’s conduct expresses his recognition of God in his very unconditional obedience and in his fear and his love. Of course, this God is real-encountered, as Barth implicitly claims by saying that God is objective, but God is not real-objective in Kant’s sense, for an Objekt cannot be obeyed or feared or loved.  

(5) “ Ces remarques tres sommaires montrent que l’objectivite don’t il est question dans la connaissance de Dieu est totalement differente de celle de la perception, qui  etait pour Kant le type de la connaissance objective . Une question est donc laissee sans reponse dans le barthisme: quelle est la nature de l’objectivite qu’il attribue a la connaissance de Dieu, et surtout quelle en est la valeur epistemologique? Nous touchons ici une isuffisance de cette theologie” (p. 571).

Here, at last, Delhougne puts his finger on the right spot. What Delhougne realizes is that

Barth’s conscious epistemology is Kantian, and that this doesn’t square with his biblical epistemology. Because of his conscious Kantian epistemology and  because Barth, as a Christian, is convinced of God’s reality, he tends to interpret God’s reality in terms of Kantian objectivity, whereas in fact the Kantian notion of objectivity cannot do justice to the reality of the biblical God. This corresponds to, and confirms, my initial intuition that there is an internal contradiction in Barth’s views on our knowledge of God.

What, then, should Barth have done? In the first place, he should have definitely abandoned the Kantian epistemology, realizing fully that “le niveau d’immanence ou se situe toute la demarche philosophique” is the wrong starting point, for there is no possible passage from ‘is’ to ‘ought.’. In the second place, he should have realized that the Kantian epistemology and the epistemology implicit in the Bible are incompatible. In the third place, ideally, Barth should have worked out the epistemology that corresponds to his view of revelation as an event, instead of relying on Kant’s epistemology. Levinas’s example, if it had been available to Barth, might have helped, with his insistence on the event of the Other’s face. As one commentator put it, referring to Levinas’s approach,

“This phenomenology attends to the suffering in the face of the other that constitutes the self as an ethical subject of responsibility. It is not so much a phenomenology in the indicative of description as it is a phenomenology in the imperative of a liability owed to one’s neighbour ” (Derek Simon, “‘No One, Not Even God, Can Take the Place of the Victim’: Metz, Levinas, and Practical Christology after the Shoah, Horizons , vol. 26, Fall 1999, Number 2, p. 205).

Appendix

Something written by Delhougne on p. 512 will clarify what he means by denying that Barth follows the philosophical tradition that begins in immanence:

“Jusqu’a Barth, la place de la raison dans la connaissance de Dieu etait generalement presentee par les theologiens comme anterieure a cette connaissance . Ce qui etait en jeu dans les discussions philosophiques et theologiques, c’etait la raison en tant que source possible de la connaissance de Dieu. Non certes qu’elle fut toujours consideree dans son caractere a priori (l’idee de Dieu tiree du tresor de mon esprit, disait Descartes), car la tradition aristotelicienne restait fidele a la mediation de la raison par l’experience; mais elle etait au moins consideree comme condition logique anterieure a toute revelation positive, et rendant possible cette revelation parce qu’elle permettait a l’homme d’y reconnaitre le Dieu don’t il aurait deja eu une certaine connaissance par ailleurs, par la force de son esprit. La raison pouvait demontrer l’existence de Dieu, determiner ses principaux attributs, avant meme qu’on ne se demande si ce Dieu pouvait se reveler” .

The theologians of whom Delhougne speaks were schooled in the critical philosophical tradition as a rsult of the marriage of Jerusalem with Athens . Hence, like Kant and all other philosophers, they had to present before the tribunal of reason any piece of purported knowledge for that piece to be certified as epistemically valid. This applied to the knowledge of God, too. Now, whereas Kant concluded that the knowledge of God did not survive the test,  these theologians, mostly influenced by Aquinas, concluded otherwise. Of course, like Aquinas himself, these theologians didn’t primarily ASSENT to God’s revelation on the basis of the approval of reason but on the basis of God’s authority. However, like Aquinas, they were sure of the approval of reason, for there could be no contradiction between reason and faith. Moreover, though they did not condition the validity of their faith on the approval of reason, they found FIDEISM unacceptable. Why? Because a faith that wouldn’t be in any way justified by reason, at least post factum , wouldn’t be worthy of assent. Needless to say, their God –I mean the God of whom they wrote philosophical and theological treatises, not the God in whom they believed and whom they adored– was the God of philosophers, not the God of Abraham and Isaac and Jesus.

A last question: Is faith certain, or is skepticism in order?

Certainty as well as skepticism and fideism are figures that have a place only in an epistemology of visual correspondence. Skepticism is based on speculative doubt that impedes assent. But life doesn’t stop because we have no speculative certainty. Whether or not we like it, we have to continue acting and facing life by way of deliberation and decision. This is the strength of the Humean derisive attack on the skeptic who doesn’t try to exit from a room through a window though he is not certain that the door is a door. Speculatively he is not certain, but practically --that is in terms of action– he is, since he exits through the door unhesitatingly.

Well, the same is th case with faith. Faith brings with it its own practical certitude, which shows in the fact that the person of faith prays God and expects the resurrection of the dead. Now, as in the case of everyday life, practical faith doesn’t exclude speculative doubts. Moreover, as faith is a matter of grace and not of biological nature, whenever faith is considered from the speculative point of view it necessarily appears doubtful, much more doubtful than the existence of the door.

Is, then, faith fideistic? Let us begin by considering whether perceptual faith is fideistic. It certainly is not speculatively certain; to someone who doesn’t believe in the existence of the door through which he has to exit, no rational overwhelming proof can be given. Either perception brings with it its own evidence, or nothing will work. Yet, the fact that the evidence perception brings with it is not rational, necessitating assent, doesn’t make people lose their perceptual faith. For all of Husserl’s criticisms, “the natural attitude” is strong enough to resist. Why? Because, given our biological nature, it motivates us to act. This is not irrational, since it is in accord with our nature of biological agents. What is irrational is the demand of philosophers who put the cart before the horses and want the human agent’s action to be justified by speculative proofs. As if such proofs would necessarily result in action!      

However, the case of faith is not exactly the same as that of perception, since faith requires grace and is not a matter of our biological nature.
