---
title: "2000-March-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/2000/2000-March-1.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


2000-March-1                                       March 21, 2000

      THE NOMINATIVE AND THE VOCATIVE AND OTHER POINTERS

      “When the child says ‘father” he sees the man differently than the
      mother... or the neighbor... The question that has to be asked is ‘How
      does the judge [the Supreme Court] see the child? or the fetus?’ I
      think it is important for the father and the mother to say of the
      fetus ‘That’s my child’” (Fallon).

       I think that Fallon is right in claiming that up to Kant (and Kant
      included) the very notion of intersubjectivity is absent (Monasterio).

      Yes, when the child says “Father” he sees the man differently than
the mother or the neighbor. Indeed, the child means “you my father,” in the
vocative, or “he my father,” in the nominative, whereas he couldn’t address
his mother or his neighbor in those words because he
is not related to them (doesn’t ‘see’ them) in the same way.

      That when the child says “father”he sees the man differently is clear
from the fact that the children who are friends of the one who calls his
father “father” in the vocative don’t call that man “father” in the
vocative, though they hear that man called “father” by his child. Why not?
Because they do not see that man as their father, or, correlatively, they
do not see themselves as children of that man So, obviously, the child who
calls the man “father” sees him in a particular way, in a way which is
different from the way his father is seen by other children. Now, the way
in which the child who calls the man “father” ‘sees’ him involves the way
in which the child sees himself in relation tois father. This is why the
child, when using the vocative, doesn’t have to say “my father.” “Father”
suffices, for this name in the vocative expresses the unique asymmetric
relationship (indicated by the “my”) between the one who calls and the one
who is called. However, when expressed in the vocative, this unique
relationship is not expressed predicatively –“you are my father,” “I am
your son”-- for the vocative is not equivalent to the nominative. In the
nominative, the name functions as the subject of a statement. But the child
who calls his father “father” has no assertive intention. If he had such
intention, he would express it by saying to the man “you are my father,” or
he would say to his friends “he is my father.” Yes, the child who says
“father” in the vocative has an implicit comprehension that the man he
calls “father” is his father, but he is not asserting his comprehension of
that fact. Rather, he is, so to say, linguistically establishing himself
and his father in the filial-paternal relationship which is theirs, so that
whatever he tells the man after calling him “father” be heard by the
addressee in his quality of father of the speaker, for it is meant by the
speaker in his quality of son of the addressee. This is why other children
who are friends of this speaker and who are no less competent users of
English than this speaker do not call the father of this child “father,”
for, not living in relation to this man in the filial-paternal
relationship, they cannot establish themselves linguistically his regard in
the filial-paternal relationship, nor do they mean whatever they will say
to this man in their quality of sons of this man.

      How does the above apply to the issue of intersubjectivity? And why
was that issue ignored at least up to Kant?

      Intersubjectivity is the name for the reciprocal relationships in
which subjects, that is, people, live with each other, and in which they
correlatively constitute each other linguistically,  in the measure in
which they are competent linguistic agents.

      Now, these relationships, by their very nature, are lived
relationships, for if they are not lived they simply are not, do not exist.
(In this sense they are like “knowledge,” which is applicative and exists
only in application. Yet, once it has taken place, it leaves traces in the
subject, and these traces can be objectified in language and transmitted to
others, but not as ontological resemblances but as linguistic statements to
be reactivated applicatively).  Thus, for instance, the filial-paternal
relationship can be described or analyzed in the nominative, but only
because it is lived or existed between a concrete father and a concrete son
who stand to each other in that relationship. If nobody could call somebody
else “father” in the vocative, there would be no room for statements in
which “father is appears used in the nominative as subject of predications,
for there would be nothing to say about the paternal-filial relationship in
general or about the paternal-filial relationship between this and that
particular subjects. This is a roundabout way of saying that the words
“father” and “son” in the vocative have a primacy over the same words used
in the nominative, for the latter refer to, or are about, the paternal-
filial relationship in which people, or certain people, actually live with
each other. Now, it so happens that philosophers either totally ignored the
vocative use of language which  reflects the relations in which people live
with each other, or mistakenly attributed to the nominative the primacy
over the vocative. Let me explain.
                                    .
                                  .    .

      One has to be ‘in faith,’ as one is ‘in love,’ in order to call God
“Father,” in the vocative.  It is conceivable that a person says of a
particular man “He is my father, but I’ll never call him ‘father.” He is
may father is a factual statement of a merely biological relationship.
Clearly, however, calling somebody “father” in the vocative is not
equivalent to the factual statement, for otherwise the statement “He is my
father but I’ll never call him ‘father’” would be meaningless. Calling
somebody “father” is not stating to him “you are my father.” It is
acknowledging to him
verbally my self-recognized and willing filiation in his regard, in the
                       hope that his future verbal and non-verbal conduct in
                       my regard will be expressive of his self-recognized
                       and willing paternity in my regard.
                                     .
                                   .    .

The separation of essence or identity and existence, of substance and
accidcents

      “Substance, in the truest and primary and most definite sense of the
      word, is that which is neither predicable of a subject nor present in
      a subject; for instance, the individual man or horse. But in a
      secondary sense those things are called substances within which, as
      species, the primary substances are included; also those which, as
      genera, include the species. For instance, the individual man is
      included in the species ‘man’, and the genus to which the species
      belongs is ‘animal’; these, therefore –that is to say, the species
      ‘man” and the genus’ animal’-- are termed secondary substances. It is
      plain from what has been said that both the name and the definition of
      the predicate must be predicable of the subject. For instance, ‘man’
      is predicated of the individual man - With regard, on the other hand,
      to those things which are present in a subject, it is generally the
      case that neither the name nor their definition is predicable of that
      of which they are present. Though, however, the definition is never
      predicable, there is nothing in certain cases to prevent the name
      being used. For instance, ‘white’ being present in a body is
      predicated of that in which it is present, for a body is called white;
      the definition, however, of the color ‘white’ is never predicable of
      the body . - Everything except primary substances is either predicable
      of a primary substance or present in a primary substance... ‘Animal’
      is predicated of the species ‘man’, therefore of the individual man,
      for if there were no individual man of whom it could be predicated, it
      could not be predicated of the species ‘man’ at all. Again, colour is
      present in a body, therefore in individual bodies, for if there were
      no individual body in which it is present, it could not be present in
      a body at all...- Of secondary substances, the species is more truly
      substance than the genus, being more nearly related to primary
      substance. For if anyone should render an account of ‘what’ a primary
      substance is..., he would give a more instructive account of an
      individual man by stating that he was man than by stating that he was
      animal, for the former description is peculiar to the individual in a
      greater degree... - Moreover, primary substances are most properly
      called substances in virtue of the fact that they are entities which
      underlie everything else, and that everything else is either
      predicated of them or present in them. Now the same relation which
      subsists between primary substance and everything else subsists also
      between the species and the genu (Aristotle, Categories, chapter 5).

N.B. -      Concerning the above quotation, several interesting things are
to be remarked. (a) All the accidents are perceptible rather than
intelligible, and are accidents of spatio-temporal substances or
individuals. (b) There is no mention of intelligible, universal, necessary
predicates of substances, for the simple reason that an accident cannot be
necessary, since it is of the notion of accident to inhere contingently
rather than necessarily. Yet Aris grants that there are necessary
properties that fall under “scientific” knowledge. Thus the division of
being into either substance or accident is inadequate.  (c) Accidents in
general seem to be necessary, for a substance cannot subsist without
concrete accidents inherent in it. [Do substantiae separatae have
accidents, or only an ontological disposition to have accidents?].

      Following Aristotle, philosophers traditionally distinguish the
question “An sit?” from the question “Quid sit?” (Cf Lonergan, Verbum). The
question “An sit?” may refer to two different things: (a) whether that of
which the question is asked is a [linguistically intelligible --a name with
a content] subject of predication, so that the predications may be either
true or false, and (b) whether that of which the question is asked actually
possesses existence.  Whatever possesses actual existence also “is” in the
sense of being (linguistically intelligible) subject of true or false
predications. However something may be conceptual subject of predications
without possessing actual existence and even without being capable of
possessing actual existence, which is the case of mere “entia rationis” (or
instance, a centaur) or of concepts as such.

      Whatever actually exists exists as a concrete particular rather than
as a universal or as a mere concept or name. Therefore actual existence is
never predicated of universals per se. If the question of actual existence
is answered in the affirmative, that is, if the referent of the question is
an “ens reale” rather than a mere concept or “ens rationis,” then,
according to Aristotle, that of which existence is affirmed has to be
either a substance or an accident of a substance. A substance that exists
is “a primary substance,” that is, a substance in which accidents actually
inhere, that is,  “a concrete individual thing, this chair, this table, in
which things qualities and attributes inhere” (Barrett, What is
Existentialism, pp. 160-161). Now, substances are self-subsistent and
supporters of accidents; therefore they can be conceived and defined by
themselves, without reference to particular accidents, whereas that is not
the case with accidents. Actually, no concrete, particular substance, that
is, no primary substance (“prima substantia” -- see Aquinas’s commentary of
Aris’ Metaphysics, p. 319, and Aris’ Categories, chapter 4) can exist
without accidents. Yet the accidents that inhere in the substance may
change without the substance being substantially modified, that is, without
the substance having ceased being the same substance.

      Let us call this Aristotle’s “substantialism.” By that I mean his
conception of the ontological primacy of substance over accidents, and his
identification of concrete existents with primary substances complete in
themselves, without needs and desires and, therefore, totally in the
present, not furure-oriented. (In this sense Aris is a nominalist, for
names are names of primary substances, not of accidents).

      From another angle, Aristotle classifies  being as either “in
potentia” or “in actu.” [But does “being” mean (a) what is intelligible,
(b) what is linguistically intelligible, (c) what actually exists?]
Moreover, he attributes the primacy to actuality over potentiality. From
actuality potentiality is deducible –a facto ad posse valet illatio-- but
not the other way around. Without being or having been actually nothing can
be said-known to be concretely possible.

      So far we haven’t heard anything about action and passion, that is,
about acting and being acted upon. Why not? For two reasons. First, because
action is subordinate to being. “Operari sequitur esse.” That is, action is
the correlate of being: the way a being acts is the correlate of its being,
corresponds to the sort of being that acts. Hence we know the cause through
its effects. Second, because “prius est esse quam operari”: That is, action
and passion are not possible predicates of being in general, but only of
actually existent beings. For something to act it has to exist.
      Aristotle mentions action and affection in chapters 8 and 4 of the
Categories – among very few other places where he gives a complete list of
the ten accidents. However, the very fact that action and affection are
often omitted indicates the secondary place they occupy in the Aristotelian
map. And this is quite significant. Because through action is important for
the knowledge of a being (or substance?), and thus is correlated to its
being, its being is not dependent on its action and is conceivable (and
therefore essentially complete) independently from action. As for
affection, it is even more secondary or accidental than action, since
actual affections depend on what other existents may happen to be around.
Affection is of course correlated with the being that is affected, but...

      The problem concerning action and affection in Aris is that he
essentially identifies being with primary substances, which are complete in
themselves. Therefore their being is independent from their qualities or
accidents and is not substantially modified by their accidents. When the
accidents change, the substance remains substantially the same, that is,
the same in its primary being. “The most distinctive mark of substance
appears to be that, while remaining numerically one and the same, is
capable of admitting primary qualities” (Categories, 5, 4a, 10). Hence
being in pain, for instance, is not substantially important, nor are
killing and being killed, or being alive or dead.

Universal, particular, and practical and theoretical reason

      Theoretical reason is contemplative. It is the reason of a pure
observer or a merely observing reason. In this sense it is purely
objective, for it is not exposed to its objects, not within their field of
action, and, therefore, cannot be affected by them, nor is it affected
either by what happens to them. In fact, insofar as what happens to them is
only what is observable, theoretical reason can include the way in which
they are observably modified,. but cannot include or involve the way in
which they are affected by what happens to them, for that is not
observable. This is why, in Descartes’s comparison, the pilot can know that
the ship has been broken only through observation. Now, as only those
creatures which are sensitive are affected by what happens to them, pure
objectivity doesn’t miss anything in the case of insensitive creatures
(plants and things) –the ones exclusively considered by Kant in the first
Critique, which has to do only with the perceivable-observable--, or in
those cases in which the way in which they are affected by what happens to
them is disciplinarily irrelevant. but may miss much that is important in
the case of sensitive creatures. Furthermore, since pure objectivity
systematically excludes from consideration the way in which the knower is
or may be affected, it substitutes the objective knower for the needful,
existential subject to whom other creatures are exposed and who is exposed
to other creatures.

      Insofar, then, as contemplative, purely objective reason is aware of
what it systematically excludes from consideration and doesn’t pretend to
constitute a picture of reality and the total picture of reality, there is
nothing wrong with it, and may furnish useful maps-tools for action. But
not if it goes beyond these limits.

      As for the notion of “picture of reality” or, what is worse, “the
total picture of reality,”
it is based on the idea that knowing is contemplating and coming to see
what is the case, objectively, to the exclusion of feeling and need,
thereby making human and animal action
unrelated to what is perceived by the needful, desirous, concretely
situated perceiver. In this way, the epistemic subject is identified with a
pure, invulnerable, unexposed or transcendent contemplating mind, and being
or reality with what is potential or actual object of knowledge of such a
mind.

      Given this division, where does the epistemic subject belong in terms
of reality?  It cannot be nothing, since it knows. But it cannot be
something real, since it cannot be known, cannot be object of knowledge
Hence the separation between mind and body –the body being object or
phenomenal or empirical and the mind being transcendent or noumenal.

      There is no room, in this view, for the existential subject who needs
and desires and fears, who is vulnerable, who is within reach of that by
which it is surrounded and has that by which it is surrounded within its
reach, who cannot help being future-oriented. And there is no room, because
this existential subject doesn’t belong in the universe of discourse where
being is conceived independently of action and passion by an epistemic
subject that conceives knowledge as contemplation, the real as correctly
contemplated object, and itself as transcendent. Indeed, this existential
subject cannot be transcendent since it is exposed, and cannot be immanent
or ‘real’ since it is no mere object.

      Assuming that what I just said about the existential subject were
granted, what follows concerning knowledge and truth?

      The idea that knowledge is a sort of picture of reality is
correlative to the notion that the knower stands in relation to reality as
an objective, invulnerable contemplator. The two fall together. But what
then? Is there no such a thing as knowledge?

      Aris grants that animals know, that they possess practical knowledge,
                       whereas he denies that plants know. How does he reach
                       such conclusions? Based on the way they act: they act
                       purposely-prudently (that is, not mechanically and
                       uniformly) to obtain their natural ends. And the more
                       they act in this way the clearer it is to Aris that
                       they know. This means that knowledge is, ot is
                       incarnated in, inseparable from, purposeful, adaptive
                       action. The animal regulates its own action according
                       to its end.

      What I just said touches upon the traditional notion of the
objectivity of knowledge, with its consequent elimination of feeling both
in the knowing subject and in the known objects. In both cases this
elimination has to do, in part, with the commonsensical, Aristotelian
assumption that only primary substances with their observable accidents are
real. This eliminates feelings, for they are unobservable accidents, and
therefore, not real accidents. Moreover, since the existential subject who
deliberates, the knower with practical reason, is systematically occluded,
feelings appear as blind, unintentional affections, therefore totally
irrelevant, rather than as dispositional attitudes or possible projects of
response.

      Obviously, if the above conception of what knowledge is is taken as
prescriptive, then whatever practical reason may involve that goes beyond,
or contrary to, such conception will not be knowledge. But the problem is
even more complex given the systematic Platonic distrust of the senses in
conjunction with his distrust of the particulars as objects of mere
opinion.
