---
title: "M-1991"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1991/M-1991.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


l) Skinner would not agree with Marx. For Skinner people are  like  animals.
They cannot possibly be deprived from a  control  over  their  actions  that
they are not meant to have. Animals cannot be dehumanized.

2) Sartre would not agree  with  Marx.  For  Sartre,  people  are  free  and
responsible no matter what the circumstances. If they  deny  that  they  are
free under capitalism, they are n bad fath, lying to themselves.

3) Marx would not agree fully with either. Not with the savage  because  the
Reservation is close to the caverns; the transformaton  of  the  environment
through praxis has barely started. Not with Mustapha Mond because  it  is  a
class society in which people are even more alienated than under  capitalism
andin which the Epsilons, through genetic tinkering, are deprived  of  their
natural capacity to think. - Which of the two societies would Marx  consider
preferable?  It  can  go  either  way,  depending  on  the  aspect  of   the
Reservation and of the New World on which the  accent  is  put,  since  they
have opposite advantages and disadvantages from  Marx's  point  of  view.  -
What would be wrong is to identify the New World  or  the  Reservation  with
Communism, for the reasons just mentioned.

4) "Work"  demands  intelligence.  Bees  do  not  work.  The  Epsilons  were
deprived of human intelligence, so they cannot possibly work. They  function
like the bees of Marx's example; their behavior is due to conditioning.  The
Alphas are intelligent and do work.
      A few students saw a similarity between capitalism and the New  World.
The comparison between  the  Alphas  as  capitalists  and  the  Epsilons  as
proletarinas is well taken, in a sense, but it does not lead  to  the  right
answer  because  the  proletarians,  unlike  the  Epsilons,   posses   human
intelligence.

5) Marx would say that people in the camps  were  alienated;  their  conduct
did not depend on them. Sartre would say that  people  chose  to  be  cruel,
since they are free no matter what  the  circumstances.  Whether  you  agree
with  Marx  or  with  Sartre  depends  on  how  persuasive  you  find  their
respective interpretations. (I, Monasterio, would lean toward  Marx  without
fully agreeing with him, because his views are partly contradicted  by  some
exceptional people,  though  they  are  mostly  confirmed  by  the  way  the
majority of people acted.

