---
title: "SERIOUS-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/major-works/SERIOUS-1"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v2.3
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\\wp\chantill\serious December 12, 91

This paper contains three independent parts. Part I: "Sartre and the spirit of seriousness" deals, incompletely, with Kant and Sartre on the Other and the Other's body. Part II, "Kant on the world of causality and the world of agency" contains long and important notes on Kant, related to Religion within the Limits of Reason . Part II, "Question and Negation," is an explanation of chapter I of Being and Nothingness .

PART I

Sartre and "the Spirit of Seriousness"

Referring to the period in which he wrote Being and

Nothingness , Sartre said in an interview:

"... my preoccupations at the time... were at bottom to provide a philosophical foundation for realism... In other words, how to give man both his autonomy and his reality among real objects, avoiding idealism without lapsing into a mechanistic materialism." ( The N. Y. Review of Books , March 26, 1970, p. 23)

If such is indeed the fundamental philosophical intention that underpins BN, studying it from this particular point of view should prove especially enlightening both as to the concrete way in which Sartre carries out his project as well as to the actual success or lack thereof of his undertaking as defined in his own terms. I am presently engaged in an in-depth exploration of BN along these lines. Because of the present time constraints, however, in this paper I will deal exclusively with Sartre's alternative to idealism, leaving out the consideration of his alternative to mechanistic materialism. Needless to say, both sides of Sartre's alternative must be taken into account in order to gauge the success of his enterprise. Fortunately, however, completness is not essential in order to get an initial grasp and appreciation of Sartre's alternative to idealism.

Man's reality and autonomy in Kant

What does Sartre have in mind when he speaks of giving man both his autonomy and his reality among real objects, thereby avoiding idealism? What kind of idealism is he talking about? Why does he find idealism at fault concerning "man's reality and autonomy"? What is Sartre's own alternative? The answer to these questions is to be gleaned from the chapters of BN on "The Other" and "The Body."

The section of of the chapter on The Other entitled "The Reef of Solipsism" identifies the position from which Sartre wants to distance himself, namely, "critical idealism" and, very specifically, Kant's own version of it.

The Critique of Pure Reason deals with the conditions of the constitution of reality by the transcendental constituting subject. How do what Sartre means by man's reality and man's autonomy fare in that enterprise? Very poorly, in Sartre's opinion. "Real," in Kant's critical idealism, is what is objectively constituted, that is, what can become known or present to the human knower as a result of a constituting process that proceeds according to, and remains within the proper limits of, the transcendental conditions for the knowledge of "object." It is Sartre's conviction, however, that Kant's conception of the real leaves no room for "man's reality and autonomy"

The gist of Sartre's objection is not that, as explicitly acknowledged by Kant, the thing in itself is unknowable, which would apply as well to the case of human beings as it applies to all objects, for on this point Sartre sides with Kant, since he explicitly dismisses the claim of "naive realism" to know what is as it is in itself. In other words, Sartre rejects idealism because it does not "give man his reality," not because it is not naively realistic. But in what particular way does Kant's idealism sacrifice man's reality?

Let us provisorily leave aside the issue whether the reality of the knowing subject is sacrificed or not by Kant's idealism.

After all, the unity of the aperception of the subject as experienced by the subject might be taken as a sort of non-phenomenal manifestation (if such language is permissible) to the subject itself of its own reality as constituter, much as Descartes claims to have an immediate experience of his own existence as a thinker whenever he thinks a thought. Indeed, the Sartrean objection on which I am now commenting has to do not with the reality of the constituting subject, but with the objective or phenomenal reality of the known or constituted subject, that is, with the reality of the Other.

Sartre's objection is two-pronged. One of its prongs concerns the reality of the human body, for which Sartre finds no room within critical idealism.

Indeed, Kant's First Critique deals with the transcendental or a priori conditions of constitution of "object," so that whatever is to qualify as real or objective has to have been constituted according to these conditions. But then--here enters the first prong of Sartre's argument-- what of the Other's body, that is, of the intentional bodies we encounter in our everyday experience and with which we interact, of the bodies who conceive and carry out their own projects as I conceive and carry mine, and which can counteract my intentions with their own?

To use Sartre's language, as long as the man sitting on the bench in the park is seen by me but does not see me, it may be thought to appear within my field of experience and action as a merely physical object that can be used as an instrument for my purposes, as any physical object can. So far, this body I encounter may be explained as being constituted by me according to the Kantian conditions of constitution of object and, therefore, qualify as real as much as a table or a stone would. But what of the same body when it looks at me with its own intentions defined by its own project within which I figure as an instrument for its purposes? How can this Other intentional body figure within the Kantian space, given that it is other , that I do not constitute its intentions but am, rather, constituted by it as an instrument for its purposes? In short, claims Sartre, there may be  room within the Kantian system of constitution for the reality of the human body as a physical object, but not as a human body. Like Descartes in the Second Meditation, and for closely related reasons, Kant can have among the realities of his world "hats and clocks, which can cover ghosts or dummies who move only by means of springs" (Second Meditation, p. 110); what Kant cannot have is human bodies.

The second prong of Sartre's argument concerns the Other as a constituting subject like myself and cuts even more deeply than the first prong. Indeed, if Kant cannot have in his world intentional bodies, even less can he have other constituting subjects, for by the very definition of objectivity the constituting subject as such is not phaenomenal, that is, is incapable of being objectively constituted. Thus the Other's reality is doubly sacrificed by Kant's critical idealism: as a human body and as a human subject.

It may be answered that Kant would not have been much disturbed by Sartre's argument, for he would gladly grant its validity within the order of causality with which the First Critique deals, only to show its invalidity within the realm of faith. After all, Kant was the first to acknowledge that the knowable world is the world of causality, where mechanistic materialism reigns and within which there is no possible room for the human as such. Making room for faith, which avowedly was Kant's central purpose, did not, in his eyes, concern only God's existence but also "man's reality," that is, his freedom and his immortality, which are no less than God's reality necessary postulates of reason. And, indeed, the Second Critique deals, precisely, Kant might reply to Sartre, with man's reality as man, that is, with his reality as a free agent who encounters other free agents. To this, however, Sartre would simply rejoin that it is too little and that it comes too late. Too little, in the first place.

Kant divides and separates neatly the order of freedom from the order of causality. Within the order of causality of the First Critique , the human body figures only as a physical body that acts and is acted upon according to causal laws, that is, as a merely physical link in the causal chain. Within the order of freedom of the Second Critique , the human subject acts freely on other free subjects. But how can such free action obtain? Is the free subject who acts on other free subjects bodied? And are the other free subjects acted upon bodied? If neither is bodied, they cannot produce effects on one another, that is, they cannot act or be acted upon. What characterizes the human body is that, because it is body, it can produce effects and effects can be produced on it, and because it is intentional body, it can produce effects according to its intentions and effects can be produced on it according to the intentions of other intentional bodies. In other words, Kant's subject, in the Kindgdom of ends, may be deemeed to be able to will, that is, have intentions; but whether such a subject is good-willed, as Kant prescribes, or ill-willed, all it can do is will his own actions and their effects; it cannot, however, either produce them or have them produced on him or her by other subjects. Thus, man's reality as preserved by Kant in the Kingdom of Ends is too little, for it is the reality of a pure spirit whose body belongs somewhere else, in the order of causality, and who by the same token not only cannot act freely nor be acted upon by other free subjects, but cannot act and be acted upon at all.

But not only is this too little; even if it were satisfactory, it would simply come too late. If man's reality as free (for without freedom the reality preserved is not human reality), is to be preserved at all, it is to be preserved here and now, within the order of causality. Indeed, it is within this order that we act and are exposed to the causal action of objects as well as to the causal-intentional action of other subjects, and it is only in relation to such action that human freedom can mean anything. Thus, even assuming that man's reality as free were really preserved by Kant in the Kingdom of Ends, that is, in the world of subjects, it would come too late to be of any use or even to have any meaning.

PART II

KANT ON THE WORLD OF CAUSALITY AND THE WORLD OF AGENCY

January 6, 1992

All references here, unless otherwise noted, to pages of Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone , Introduction by Theodore M. Greene and John R. Silber - Harper Torchobooks, Harper & Row Publishers, New York 1960) - Greene: "The Historical Context and Religious significance of Kants Religion," pp. 1x-lxxviii.  Silber:"The Ethical Significance of Kant's Religion," pp.. lxxix-cxxxix)

The real problem with Kant's critical idealism lies in the articulation between the First and the Second Critiques , in the way in which they are bifurcated and related to each other.

The First Critique deals with "theoretical rationality" (theoretical or speculative reason or contemplatively objective, disinterested reason), the Second with "volitional rationality" (volitional or interested or practical reason) (cxxx).

But the Second Critique is already conceived under, makde possible and necessary by, and subject to, the strictures imposed by the the peculiar chopping off of the world and the results of the First.

Some of these strictures are important for my purposes. They arise from distinction and the relationship between the phenomenal and the noumenal, the distinction between theoretical and practical reason, the nature and place of feeling and desire, and the interrelationship among freedom, rationality, and sensibility. Let us deal with these important strictures.

(1) The distinction between phenomenal and noumenal.

First the data concerning the two standpoints (which is Kant's as author standpoint? is it not merely theoretical in the Critiques, since he is not deliberating and acting?) and the two worlds:

" The Problem of the Two Standpoints : ... In order to resolve the Third Antinomy [without which solution freedom was impossible] (and for other reasons...) Kant decided, in the first Critique , to bifurcate reality into the phenomenal world of appearances and the noumenal world of the things themselves. All envents in the phenomenal order... are necessarily related in terms of the category of causality and are in principle fully predictable. In the noumenal order, on the other hand, free causes can express themselves; that is, events may take place in the absence of any antecedent causal determinants. Scientific experience and knowledge pertain to the phenomenal world; moral experience and knowledge pertain to the noumenal.

"Kant could never adjust himself, however, to this bifurcation of human experience and human nature which this 'two standpoints theory' requires. Although he asserted that the two realms exist 'independently of one another and without interfering whit each other (Kemp Smith, p. 279; cf. Beck, p. 209), he found it impossible to speak of moral problems without presupposing their complete interaction..."

"This experience [of moral obligation] presupposes the temptation of the moral self in the noumenal world by his natural self in the phenomenal world; it also presupposes the capacity of the moral self in the noumenal world to reorder the natural, phenomenal world according to the demands of the moral law" (xcvii).

"Kant attempted to resolve the problems of interaction without resorting to the theory of pre-established harmony [whenever a murderer in the noumenal order freely wills to kill a victim, a gun in the phenomenal order is prederetmined to go off in his hand] by holding that the noumenal world is timeless and therefore that decisions made therein (having no cuasal antecedents) can be regarded regulatively as causes of temporal sequences in the phenomenal world. But the resuults of this attempt are disastrous. In the first place, if the series of phenomenal events is in no way altered by the intrusion of noumenal free causes, the latter are clearly superfluuous. As long as the acts of moral volition cannot alter the determination of events in the phenomenal world, all categorical demands that they do so are in vain. Second K erred either in designating the moral realm as the noumenal realm or in denying that the noumenal realm is temporal, for moral volition is inelcutably temporal . The will is temmpted in time, decides in time and, dependenig on hiits decision, feels guilty or satisfied in time (xcviii-xcix).

"If we are to understand K's ethics and, specifically, his theory of the will as developed in the Religion , we must recognize that interaction between the phenomenal and the noumenal worlds is required--even though K himself has denied that such interaction is possible" (xcix).

"First, we must revise some of K's views in the first and second Critiques in light of his views in the third. K's early confidence that in principle science can predict all human activity is absent in the third Critique ( ibid. ).

"In the First Critique Kant introduced the distinction between phenomena and noumena for two reasons: (a) he wanted to emphasize the fact that the mind is passive in sensation, and that knowledge resulting from the articulation of the data of sensibility by the categories of the understanding is merely knowledge of the appearance of reality ; (b) he wanted to resolve the Third Antinomy by establishing independent orders for freedom and causality" (ci):

"... K defined noumena as things in themselves, as objects of non-sensible intuition, and he denied that human beings were capable of non-sensible intuition. Morevover he defined phenomena as objects of appearance which are known by applying categories of the understanding to sensible intuition. In terms of these definitions there is obviously no place for moral experience in either realm. The noumenal realm is closed to all human experience through the lack of intellectual intuition and the phenomenal realm is limited to experience conceptualized by the categories of the understanding. We cannot object to Kant's insistence on sensible intuition, on the perceptual, as a conditon for knowledge: Kant has amply described the dangers of superstition and fanaticism which accompany merely conceptual flights into the transcendent. We must question, however, his assumption that everything given in sensibility, in the matrices of space or time, has to be conceptualized by the categories of the understanding. Kant did not err in his definition of the noumenal; he erred, rather, in placing arbitrary and uncritical limits on the phenomenal, for they forced him mistakenly and contradictorily to locate moral experience in the noumenal realm. The experience of moral obligation--which K called the one fact of pure reason--occurs in time, in inner sense, and therefore involves sensible intuition... We have no reason to say that this knowledge stems from an intellectual intuition of noumena. K rightly insists in the Religion ... that we know ourselves morally only as we appear to ourselves, that we can never know the secret motives of the heart or the character of our dispositions except by indirect reasoning from our moral actions. Our knowledge of freedom, the will, and ourselves as moral beings would seem consequently, to be a knowledge of moral phenomena and a part of our knowledge of the phenomenal realm as a whole. By broadening the conception of the phenomenal world to include all aspects of human experience--the moral, aesthetic, and organic, no less than the theoretical --we pose many problems for Kant's interpreeters, but no insurmountable problems for Kant's system " (ci-cii).

"... we need not be troubled by K's insistence on the presence of Willkür in both phenomenal and noumenal orders. We recognize the temporal nature of Willkür and its presence in both moral and theoretical aspects of the phenomenal world. Willkür can be regarded from a theoretical standpoint as a theoretical phenomenon or from a moral standpoit as a moral phenomenon ... It is noteworthy that in the Religion K put no stock in his earlier technical distinction between phenomena and noumena; he remarks, with some suggestion of impatience, that 'these expressions [phenomena and noumena] are used only because of the schools' ( Religion , p. 13)... we must bear in mind that, strictly speaking, all so-called noumenal acts should be regarded as morally phenomenal acts of inner sense which are not publicly observable, and that the noumenal realm should be regarded as the locus of the will only when it is considered as transcending human knowledge as a thing in itself" (ciii).

"Here then we have the clue to Kant's epistemological position. Reality can be' known only so far as we can (a) come int first hand intuitive contact with it, and (b) rationally apprehend and interpret what such intuition yields. The first half of the Critique of Pure Reason is devoted to a brilliant analysis of the nature and implications of our knowledge of the physical world. We establish contact with this world , K teaches, through sensuous intuiton which, in turn, is possible to us mortals only under the 'forms' of space and time. Even in our simplest perceptual experience these sensous data, in their spatio-temporal patterns, are apprehended and interpreted in terms of certain basic rational concepts, the categories . There results from the organic interpalay and cooperation of these diverse mental pprocesses... our knowledge of the physical world to which we ourselves, as physical beings, belong.

"Upon this analysis of the knowing process K now bases certain revolutionary conclusions which are of great importance to his philosophy of religion. Deeply impressed with our entire dependence, in cognition, upon our finite faculties of sense and reason, which probably are inadequate to give what may be called a cosmic insight into the inner nature of things, he insists upon branding the physical world which we can know as merely phenomenal. This is the world which scientists study with such large measure of success... It is a world of order, untouched by miracles and subject to the categories of substance and causality... But--and it is here that Kant, thus far the defender of Netonian science, limits its scope in the interest of morality, art, andreligion--only an unjustifiable materialistic dogmatism is the whole of realtity. Without denying objective reality to this world, or ascribing it to a Berkeleyan subjectivity, K yet insists upon the possibility, suggested to us by reason, of an ultimate or noumenal reality, so constituted that mortal men cannot apprehend it through sensuous intuition or even grasp its essential structure through reason " (xxxviii-xxxix).

" K separates science from religion through the distinction noumenal phenomenal. Speculative reason cannot prove anything regarding man's immortality, transcendental freedom, an intelligible world, an unconditioned Being. It can merely point out that nothing in the empirical world contradicts these notions. For the same reasons materialism can never prove its case" (xli).

Much of the above is useful. However, I am very uncomfortable with Silber's solution, for it leaves intact the noumenal-phenomenal distinction and their relation to intuition or the lack thereof, which shows that Silber (as Kant) thinks in terms of knowledge "as our contact with the world.". It seems to me that feeling, emotion, desire need to be introduced into the picture to really correct Kant.

What restrictions does the distinction between phenomenal and noumenal impose on the Second Critique? (a) It forces K to assume that 'moral phenomena,' unlike physical phenomena, are not scibilia, knowable, but matters of practical faith (for there is no intuition, except perhaps for the categorical imperative). (b) It forces K to assume the impossibility of moral conflict, because of the independence of the two orders. (c) It implies that human action and even mere agent's action (except by un-Kantian harmonia praestabilita) are impossible. (d) Same with the body, starting with my own. (e) Same with encounter with the Other. (f) Same with our exposure as subjects to effects, both physical and intentional. (g) Same with historical revelation, which becomes necessarily unintelligible, theoretically irrational.

(All these are problems which do not get an adequate solution under Silber's proposal).

(2) The distinction between theoretical and practical reason

By definition, this sharp distinction establishes an abysmal gap between reason as cognitional and reason as volitional or active, between the sighted knower and the faithful but blind agent.

- In the chapter on the antinomies Kant mentions the cosmological questions in which every right-thinking person has "a practical interest" (xl).

- "K does not conceive of moral intuition as a direct irrational insight into the rightness or wrongness of any particular act; it is 'intuitive' only in that man's sense of the reality and vast significance of the general distinction between right and wrong is immediate, irreducible, not itself debatable. Each specific moral decision, however, calls for the ACTIVE use of reason. Here reason becomes 'PRACTICAL'. WHEREAS SPECULATIVE  REESON AIMS SOLELY AT KNOWLEDGE FOR ITS OWN SAKE, PRACTICAL REASON COMPETES WITH THE INCLINATIONS IN DETERMINING MAN'S WILL AND GUIDING HIS CONDUCT . ... Here moral intuition, the immediate apprehension of moral value, takes the place of, or at least constitutes an essential supplement to, sensuous intuition, and practical reason, whose law (the moral law) is the analogue to the categories of the understanding organizes blind moral intuition into a rational moral apprehension. Kant does, indeed, refuse to call this apprehension 'knowledge' on the ground that we are here in the realm of moral 'faith' (lii). On moral intuition see also liv-lv.

- "K did not leave place for the introduction of desires into the will nor for the capacity of the will to act in opposition to the law when he defined the will as practical reason ... K was on solid ground in arguing that freedom involves rationality. But in the Groundwork he fails to see that the irrational is a mode of the rational, that heteronomy is a mode of freewilling." (lxxxii).

- "K now insists [in the second Critique] that freedom in the negative sense--now called transcendental freedom--involves more than mere independence of the will from causal necessity in time and nature: transcendental freedom also involves absolute spontaineity" (lxxxiii).

- "In the third place, K's advance in the second Critique may be seen in his recognition that the will which is categorically obligated is not the will of a rational being as such but of a rational and sensible being--a human being torn between the demands of his sensible and rational natures" (lxxxiv).

"... if desires are to tempt the will, thereby transforming the moral law into a categorical imperative, they must have access to the will. THE WILL, ACCORDINGLY, IS NOW DEFINED BOTH AS PRACTICAL REASON AND AS THE FACULTY OF DESIRE" (LXXXIV).

- Kant is in the end unable to explain how one and the same man (for all his twofold nature) can both be free and yet not free in one and the same act (liv-llv).

- The Summum Bonum includes both virtue and happiness (lvii-lxv). "Thus a faith in the Summum Bonum is the result of man's rational conviction that only if happiness is ultimately proportioned to virtue can his sense of justice be satisfied" (lvii). "To avert this misfortune [that the Summum Boum is not possible] K makes his two famous postulates, viz., the existence of God to equate virtue and happiness, and of a future life in which man may attain to perfect virtue and receive its adequate reward... Since it is man's duty to promote the Summum Bonum he is under moral obligation to postulate the conditions which will give it reality" (lvii).

- K in Critique of Judgment: "Without men the whole creation would be a mere waste, in vain, and without final purpose. But it is not in reference to man's cognitive faculty (theoretical reason) that the being of everything else gets in the world its worth; he is not there merely that there may be someone to contemplate the world" (lxix).

- "... his willingness to apply the term knowledge solely to the joint product of sense and reason ; morality yields supreme pragmatic assurance, yet its judgments lack for him the certainty which characterizes propositions relating to the phenomenal world... He did, assign an ethical primacy to faith over knowledge; and it may be urged that he employed the term faith, in this connection, merely to indicate the essential difference between man's sensuous and moral intuitions, without intending to discount the congnitive significance of the latter . The place of honor to which he assigns moral values in his larger philosophical system would seem to justify such an interpretation. Yet the main tenor of his writings indicates a PRIOR PHILOSOPHICAL ALLEGIANCE TO THE INSIGHT BASED ON REASON AND SENSATION ALONE" ((LXXC-VI).

-"Thanks to the thorougoing separation which K has effected between the intelligible and sensible worlds and between man's rational and sensible natures , it is inevitable that he should find no essential harmony between them In the Summum Bonum , however just such an harmonious connection is declared to be necessary" (lx).

-"The existence of God can be established only by practical reason and the only God we can know is a moral God. - God, freedom, and immortality are thus the only objects of moral faith In regard to these three alone may man transkend experience; ane even with regard to these, the assurance he arrives at is not a cognitive or scientific but only a moral certainty . To go further than this is nothing but Schwärmerei , the indulgence in fanciful dreams. ' Here are the limits of our reason clearly delineated . Whoever presumes to overstep them will be punished for his zeal by reason itself with disgust and error. But, if we remain within these limits, we shall be rewarded by becoming both wise and good' ( Vorlesungken über die philosophische Religionslehre , pp. 159-160) (lxii).

"K's Summum Bonum kproof of God's existence is probably the weakest of his theological doctrines. The root of the difficulty lies in his dualistic view of mans nature. In order to secure human freekedom [without which no morlaity is possible] he has anaylyzed man into two irreconcilable natures, the one abstractly rational and noumenal, the other phenomenal and purely sentient. The former is completely severed from the empirical world and all empirical motives, desires and impulses, and is intent only upon the performance of what is often described by K as joyless duty. The latter is empty of all moral reasonableness and is concerned solely with irrational sensuous satisfaction. Man thus bifurcated is a thoroughly unreal creature of K's imagination. Consequently both virtue and happinesss tend to be conceived of in an artificial manner. Virtue is defined in purely rationalistic terms. The moral law is first declared to be capable of determining man's will independently of all external aid such as the empirical inclination to hpappiness... In short morality is said to be the conern of a purely autonomous rational will. K's introduction of happiness into this moral scheme is therefore inconsistent with his own principles and highly detrimental to them. The Summum Bonum , with happiness equated with virtue is indeed said to be merely an ideal of reason which must not be made a mnotive for action. Yet without the assurance of its reality reason cannot be practical. K states this very plainly in his Ledctures. There must be a rational Being who rules the world with reason and according to moral principles and who has decreed a future state where virtue shall be rewarded, 'for otherwise all the subjectively necessary duties which I am under oilbigation as a trational being to perform lose their objective realtity. Why should I make myself worthy of happines by means of moral conduct if there exists no Being who can secure me this happiness? Thus without God I should have to be either a visionary or a scoundrel' ( Vorlesungen , p. 129). 'If morality can offer me no prospect that my neeed to be happy will be satisfied, neither can it command me' ( ibid ., p. 199). Professor Pringle-Pattison's remark is well justified: '... the preacher of duty for duty's sake, who had so rigoroulsy purged his ethics of all considerations of happiness or natural inclination, surprises us with the baldly hedonistic lines on which he rounds off his theory. Job is not to serve God for naught after all....'" ((lxii-lxiii).

- "The crux of the matter is obviously Kant's inability to recognize a distinctive religious experience, which is akin to that moral experience which he himself describes in such detail, yet it is not identical with it. This religious experience implies a knowledge of God as real as K's own apprehension of the moral law... Yet his characteristic belief is that God is not directly knowable (CITATIONS IN SUPPORT). TO THIS A MODERN THEOLOGIAN PERTINENTLY REPLIES: "IF KNOWLEDGE IS INDISSOLUBLY WEDDED TO SENSE, OF COURSE IT IS VAIN TO SPEAK OF OUR 'KNOWING GOD.' BUT IF GOD IS NOT KNOWABLE, FAITH IN hIM MUST INDEED BE BLIND, RELIANCE ON HIS ASSISTANCE HAZARDOUS, AND COMMUNION WITH hIM IMPOSSIBLE " (lxxvi-vii).

The exclusion of feeling, emotion and desire from the field of theoretical reason.

- The only point at which, I think, emotion and desire show in the First Critique is in the three "questions of human interest": freedom immortality, God . For the rest, the sensible data are perceptual data, that is, they include the subject only as objective, disinterested contemplator, not as exposed agent .

- K defines happines , the second ingredient of the Summum Bonum , as the object of man's desire "that can be satisfied by nature in its beneficence. It has to do with man's sentient nature (lix).

- "Thanks to the thoroughgoing separation which K has effected between the intelligible and the sensible worlds and between man's rational and sensible nature's , it is inevitable that he should find no essential harmony between them. In the Summum Bonum , however, just such an harmonious connection is declared to be necessary. We must therefore postulate the existence of a Being who acts in harmony with the moral law and who is also the ground and cause of nature" (Lx). (See whole terxt above).

- "K COULD NEVER ADJUST HIMSELF TO THE BIFURCATION OF HUMAN EXPERIENCE AND HUMAN NATURE WHICH THIS 'TWO STANDPOINTS THEORY' REQUIRES. ALTHOUGHE HE ASSERTED THAT THE TWO REALMS EXIST 'INDEPENDENTLY OF ONE ANOTHER AND WITHOUT INTERFERING WITH EACH OTHER,' HE FOUND IT IMPOSSIBLE TO SPEAK OF MORAL PROBLEMS WITHOUT PRESUPPOSING THEIR COMPLETE INTERACTION. THE EXPERIENCE OF MORAL OBLIGATION IS A PRIME EXAMPLE OF THOROUGH INTERACTION.... THIS EXPERIENCE PRESUPPOSES THE TEMPTATION OF THE MORAL SELF IN THE NOUMENAL WORLD BY HIS NATURAL SELF IN THE PHENOMENAL WORLD ; IT ALSO PRESUPPOSES THE CAPACITY OF THE MORAL SELF IN THE NOUMENAL WORLD TO REORDER THE NATURAL, PHENOMENAL WORLD ACCORDING TO THE DEMANDS OF THE MORAL LAW" (XCVII). (SEE ALSO FOLLOWING PAGE FOR CRITICISMS).

- On the difference between wille and wilkur see (civ).

- "The difference between pathological pleasure and and moral pleasure is thus a difference in kind. But the difference cannot be observed from the theoretical standpoint , from which all pleasures and incentives appear alike as influences which affect and ultimately determine Willkur. The individual who feels respect for the moral law appears to the theoretical observer simply as one of those rare persons who, as a matter of fact, likes to do his duty. The difference between moral and pathological feeling cannot be observed on this level because the free moral power of Willkur is not a theoretical phenomenon (SEE ARIS). From the moral standpoint, however, the difference... is OBSERVABLE... Pathological pleasure originates in the sensible nature of the human will, in Willkur as the merely passive recipient of sensuous influences... Moral pleasure.... originates in the rational nature of the human will, in Willkur as the active, self-originating, spontaneous (hence rational) aspect of the will" (cix-cx).

- "Many moralists and theologians have sought the condition or occasion of evil in man's sensible nature. K, however, explicitly rejects this position and argues tha man's sensible nature, neither evil in itself nor the occasion of evil, is good and worthy of fulfillment... Furthermore, the attribution of evil to man's sensuous nature rests on the assumption that men can be moved to action by their senses alone,--without their willful cooperation--and thus reduces human nature to an animal level on which evil is impossible " (Cxii-xiii).

- 'Willkur is confronted by the demands of its own rational nature, present in Wille, and by the demands of its sensuous nature, present in its natural desires and inclinations. Willkur is not torn between good and evil but rather confronts two basically different kinds of good" (cxiv). All men have within them good incentives of happines and of virtue" (cxiv).

- " Our everyday judgments are made on the basis of empirical observation and concern the phenomenal virtue of the will and the legality of its actions. We can only conjecture about the motives behind the actions of others, and we can never be sure of the motives behind our own... On the level of mere observations, then, we judge the will on the basis of its specific actions, and we conclude that most if not all wills are both good and evil. Had we the omniscience of a divine judge, however, to observe the dispositional act, the basic intention which is the ultimate motive behind all specific acts, this judgment would be supplemented. The disposition would be found to be either good or evil and its moral quality only more or less distorted by the specific acts which follow from it... From the standpoint of such an omnisicent judge, we would judge the noumenal nature of the will and the morality of its actions" (cxix) .

"We cannot ignore the problem of forgiveness nor can we accept Kant's futile resolution of it. It calls for a serious reconsideration of Kant's assumptions that freedom is absolute and that freedom is essentially rational --even if rationality be expanded to admit of the full potentiality of irrationality as one mode of expression. When freedom is considered in termms of rationality, it is inevitably narrowed to the limits of conscious intention and made far too intelllectual" (cxxxiv).

- "K attaches no importance to the resurrection of the body" (lix).

- " K's Summum Bonum proof of God's existence is the weakest of his theological doctrines . The root of the difficulty lies in his dualistic view of man's nature . In order to secure human freedom he has anylized man into two irreconcilable natures, the one abstractly rational and noumenal, the other phaenomenal and purely sentient . The former is completely severed from the empirical world and all empirical motives, desires and impulses, and is intent only upon the performance of what is often described by K as joyless duty. The latter is empty of all moral reasonableness and is concerned solely with irrational sensous satisfaction. Man thus bifurcated is a thoroughly unreal creature of K's own imagination. Consequently both virtue and happiness tend to be conceived of in an artificial manner. Virtue is defined in purely rationalistic terms. The moral law is first declared to be capable of determining man's will independently of all external aid ...; to want to do one's duty is to K a cause for suspicion.... In short, moraltiy is said to be the concern of a purley autonomous rational will. K's introduction of happiness into this moral scheme is therefore inconsistent with his own principles... The Summum Bonum, with happines equated with virtue, is indeed said to be merely an ideal of reason which must not be made a motive of action. Yet without the assurance of its reality reason cannot be practical" (lxii-lxiii).

- "Given that 'happiness is a minor matter which pertains to the phenomenal world,' Galloway declines to make K's inference and "mantains that religion is not essential" (lxv).

- " The relation of pleasure and desire to the will was even more troubling to K. He never seemed fully clear in the second Critique about the status of the faculty of desire : sometimes he refers to it as an aspect of the will; at other times he refers to it as no more than a sensibly determined faculty of appetition. He was similarly unsure regarding the role of pleasure in the moral determination of the will: he flatly contradicts himself by both affirming and denying that moral satisfaction can be a kind of pleasure and a determinant of the will s the facutly of desire" (lxxxvi).

- "the moral law forces us to be aware of ourselves as agents rather than as mere cretures of desire" (lxxxvii).

- "It is not merely from impulse that an individual acts from impulse. Even heteronomous action involves the use of reason , independent from inclinations, to determine maxims that negate both freedom and rationality by following inclinations" (xcii).

-  " No impulse or desire can be a determining incentive for the Wilkür until the Wilkür chooses to make it so... 'Only thus,' K argued, 'can an incentive, whatever it may be, coexist with the absolute spontaneity of the Willkür" (xcv).

- "... a man, the being who experiences moral obligation, must stand IN TWO WORLDS--the natural and the moral--in order to experience as obligation the conflict between them... The Wilkur of man as a natural being is the ground of human action and human virtue as phenomenom (virtus phaenomenon). The Wilkur of man as a moral being is the ground of the adoption of maxims on which action is based and the source of intelligible virtue (virtus noumenon)" ( xcvi ).

- "Certain it is that he acquired a lasting abhorrence of all religious emotion and would have nothing to do with prayer or the singing of hymns the rest of his life" (xcviii).

- Complete separation of religion and science (xxxi).

- K insists that in Religion his sole purpose was to criticize not Xtianity but the religion of reason , whose practical sufficiency but speculative inadequacy he claims to have demonstrated (xxxv).  

PART III

Question and Negation

Freedom and reflection

Chapter 1 of Part I of BN is a "regressive analysis" from the For-itself's ability to assume negative attitudes in regard to the surrounding world to the For-itself's freedom. The For-itself, states Sartre, is capable of effecting a double "nihilation": a  nihilation of the world, and a self-nihilation. What this double nihilation reveals is that the For-itself is free.

The unnecessarily abstract and portentous language used by Sartre may easily hide rather than reveal. Let us express Sartre's most important points concerning the For-itself's negative attitudes in more concrete and understandable terms.

The chapter starts with a particular human conduct in regard to the world: the conduct of questioning. Sartre calls it a negative conduct. Why? Because it "nihilates" the world. The person who questions "puts the world in abeyance." Let us try and understand what this "nihilation" of the world means.

The person whose car stops and who asks "What is wrong with the motor?" does not annul or suppress the motor either physically or even mentally but, rather makes it into object-of-consideration, into something-to-be-examined and interrogated. This interrogation, hoiweever, is of the practical order, not for the mere sake of knowing what is the case. Indeed, the conduct of the interrogator will depend on the answer reached. If, for instance, the answer is that the carburetor needs cleaning, that is what the interrogator will do. But if the answer reached is that a new distributor is needed, the interrogator will change the distributor.

We are, therefore, confronted with a situation in which the response of the human being to the surrounding world--represented in this particular case by the stopping of the motor--is not a mere effect of the world surrounding the person but, rather, the result of a decision reached by the person on the basis of an intelligent consideration of the world--in this case, the motor. In other words, it is not a matter of Stimulus-Response, where the response is automatically elicited by a feature of the environment as is the case, for instance, with the contraction of the pupil when exposed to light. Stimulus-Response is just an example of causality in the realm of living organisms. But such is not the case in our example. The fact that the car stopped does not cause the person to clean the carburetor or to change the distributor. If that were the case, when the motor of my car stops I would not need to put the world in abeyance, to constitute the motor into object of consideration, to interrogate it. An effect follows automatically its cause; in this case, however, the conduct of changing the distributor is not automatic, it follows a decision (whether the decision is right or wrong matters little for our purposes) to change the distributor on the basis of an interrogation or examination of the motor. Here, says Sartre, "the circuit of causality" has been interrupted. This, very precisely, is what "the first nihilation" achieves: it interrupts the circuit of causality in which effects follow automatically.

So much for "the first nihilation," the "nihilation of the world." It is, however, to "the second nihilation," the self- nihilation by the interrogating subject, that Sartre wants to regress, for it is this second nihilation that constitutes the glaring manifestation of human freedom. This second nihilation is achieved through what Sartre calls "reflection," the turning of the interrogator's attention from the world to himself or herself.

The nihilation of the world is always accompanied by a correlative self-nihilation. Indeed, putting the world in abeyance to determine what modification of the world is needed involves putting myself--my decision and my future conduct--in abeyance, too. As Sartre expresses it,

For man to put a particular existent out of circuit is to put himself out of circuit in relation to that existent. In this case he is not subject to it; he is out of reach; it cannot act on him, for he has retired beyond a nothigness . Descartes following the Stoics has given a name to this possibility which human reality has to secrete a nothingness which isolates it--it is freedom (BN, p. 60).

Sartre's point is, very simply, that any and every nihilation of the world to determine the modification of the world that is in order or called for, but not causally determined by the world, involves a self-nihilation, a putting in abeyance by the subject of his or her own future conduct which is to be determined by the subject, not by the world's state. In other words, any and every nihilation of the world effected by me implies and involves as its correlate my own freedom.

It follows from this that I should realize (in the sense of being glaringly aware of) my freedom every time I act to realize a project I have conceived, such as the project of changing the distributor, which is not produced as an effect by the fact that my car stopped. And yet, as Sartre is constrained to admit, most of the time not only do I not realize my freedom under those circumstances, but rather I feel as if the world imposed on me the tasks I have to perform. The reason for this failure to realize my freedom, explains Sartre, is lack of "reflection."

Let us follow him step by step in his analysis of this point.

The consciousness of man in action is non-reflective consciousness. It is consciousness of something, and the transcendent which discloses itself to this consciousness is of a particular nature; it is a structure of exigency in the world..." (BN, p. 74).

To understand Sartre's point, let us return to the case of the person whose car stops. This is a case of what Sartre calls "man in action." This man is going to his office when his car stops. When the car stops he has only one thing in mind: to get the car running as soon as possible. His attention is concentrated on the car, not on himself; on "the transcendent," not on the immanent. The transcendent on which his attention is riveted, the "something" of which he is aware, is the motor not running. And this transcendent discloses itself to the man with a very definite structure, "a structure of exigency," as car-to-be-repaired-as-soon-as-possible. Hence, although theoretically this man could realize that his conduct of changing the distributor is his own , that it has not been elicited from him by the motor as an automatic response, that he himself has originated his project of changing the distributor, that changing the distributor is the result of his own decision, nonetheless, because he is engaged in action rather than reflecting on himself, his conduct appears to him with a structure of exigency, as imposed on him by the fact that the car stopped. In other words, though this man's action is a free action, since it is not an effect produced on him by the causal order but conceived and chosen by the man himself, he nonetheless, in the non-reflective engagement of "man in action" feels trapped, as it were, in a world that imposes constant demands on him.

Thus in what we shall call the world of the immediate, which delivers itself to our unreflective consciousness, we do not first appear to ourselves, to be thrown subsequently into enterprises. Our being is immediately 'in situation'; that is, it arises in enterprises and knows itself first in so far as it is reflected in those enterprises. We discover ourselves then in a world peopled with demands... (BN, p. 77).

Exactly as the man of our example finds himself as ' having to ' change the distributor, so do all of us, in our everyday unreflective lives, find ourselves in a world peopled with demands. I have to get up early, for I have to teach my first class at 9.00, and then I have to attend that damned meeting, and then..., etc., etc. In short, the consciousness of the person engaged in action, that is, of the non-reflective person, is anything but consciousness of freedom.

It is for this very reason that Sartre considers it essential to focus on the second nihilation, on the self-nihilation involved in every nihilation of the world. For only on the basis of this attention to self in which "reflection" consists can obtain the full realization of my freedom, that is, of my "disengagement from the causal order," of my "being out of reach" of the surrounding world.

My car, then, which stopped while I was going to my office appears to me with a structure of exigency, as to-be-repaired-as-soon-as-possible. It looks as if my whole conduct of getting out of the car, examining the motor, zeroing in on the distributor, and finally changing it were imposed on me by the fact that the car stopped. Indeed, says, Sartre, it looks that way as long as I do not make fully explicit through reflection the second nihilation by which not the world, but myself, is put in abeyance before responding to the situation. As usual, Sartre makes his point through concrete examples:

The alarm clock which rings in the morning refers to the possibility of my going to work, which is my possibility. But to apprehend the summons of the alarm as a summons is to get up. Therefore the very act of getting up is reassuring, for it eludes the question, 'Is work my possibility?' Consequently it does not put me in a position to apprehend the possibility of quietism, of refusing to work, and finally the possibility of refusing the world and the possibility of death. In short, to the extent that I apprehend the meaning of the ringing, I am already up at its summons; this apprehension guarantees me against the anguished intuition that it is I who confer on the alarm clock its exigency--I and I alone (BN, pp. 75-76).

For the rest, there exist concretely alarm clocks, signboards, tax forms, policemen, so many guard-rails against anguish. But as soon as the enterprise is held at a distance from me, as soon as I am referred to myself because I must await myself in the future, then I discover myself suddenly as the one who gives its meaning to the alarm clock, the one who by a signboard forbids himself to walk on a flower bed on the lawn, the one from whom the boss's order borrows its urgency, the one who decides the interest of the book which he is writing, the one finally who makes the values exist in order to determine his action by their demands (BN, p.77).

To see Sartre's point quite clearly it may be helpful to distinguish sharply the nihilation of the world from the self-nihilation. As we already know, nihilating the carburetor does not mean to suppress it physically or mentally, but to constitute it into object-of-consideration. This is what I do by the mere fact of asking "What is wrong with the carburetor?" In this case, very obviously, my attention is concentrated on the carburetor, not on myself. At this stage it looks as though my future conduct of changing the carburetor were dictated to me by the state of the distributor. Now, however, I "reflect," that is, "I refer myself to myself," not to the carburetor. It is at this point that I clearly realize that changing or not changing the carburetor are my possibilities, that is, possibilities whose realization or non-realization depends on me. Similarly, says Sartre, when the alarm clock rings in the morning, my getting up seems to be imposed on me by the alarm clock; however, I have only to reflect, that is, to turn my attention to myself as being in abeyance, as questioning the way in which I will respond to the alarm clock, in order to realize that my getting or not getting up are my possibilities, that getting up or not depends on me and not on the alarm clock. And so it is with the rest of my actions. I see a signboard that reads "Forbidden to step on the flowers." The structure of exigency seems to be there. But I have only to refer myself to myself to realize that, ultimately, stepping or not stepping on the flowers, obeying or disobeying the order conveyed by the signboard, depends on me. I am, therefore, the one who confers on the alarm clock authority to summon me by choosing to hear its ringing as a summon to be obeyed rather than as a bothersome noise to be suppressed. I am the one who confers on the signboard the power to forbid me to step on the flowers by choosing to take it as an order to be obeyed rather than as an intrusive wish to be ignored.

This last example already suggests a connection between the point Sartre is making concerning values in general and the values of the moral order. Indeed, ought not I to respect my neighbor's wish not to step on his flowers?

There is no categorical imperative for Sartre. Actually, there are no moral imperatives of any kind. Indeed, in the same way in which as soon I refer myself to myself I realize that I, and I alone, am the one who by choosing to get up in reply to the sound of the alarm clock confers on it its structure of exigency, in that very way I discover that I, and I alone, am the one who by deciding not to step on my neighbor's flowers confers on my neighbor's desire concerning her flower bed its value as 'to-be-respected.' And if this value is the result of my free decision to obey the wish of my neighbor, then I cannot fail to realize that I, and I alone, am the arbitrary creator of moral values.

But why, then, do most of us experience a sort of categorical imperative to respect other people, whether or not we obey that imperative? For exactly the same reason, answers Sartre, that most of us experience the world with a structure of exigency, as dictating our conduct, to wit: for lack of reflection. Indeed, as long as we do not reflect, we do not fully realize that the structure of exigency ultimately depends on us. It is I, and I alone, who confer on the objects of the surrounding world the particular structure of exigency that they seem to possess on their own:

In the same way, what we might call everyday morality is exclusive of ethical anguish. There is ethical anguish when I consider myself in my original relation to values. Values in actuality are demands which lay claim to a foundation. But this foundation can in no way be being , for every value which would base its ideal nature on its being would thereby cease even to be a value and would realize the heteronomy of my will. Value derives its being from its exigency and not its exigency from its being. It does not deliver itself to a contemplative intuition which would apprehend it as being a value and thereby would remove from it its right over my freedom. On the contrary, it can be revealed only to an active freedom which makes it exist as a value by the sole fact of recognizing it as such. It follows that my freedom is the unique foundation of values and that nothing , absolutely nothing, justifies me in adopting this or that particular value, this or that particular scale of values. As a being by whom values exist, I am unjustifiable. My freedom is anguished at being the foundation of values while itself without foundation. It is anguished in addition because values, to the fact that they are essentially revealed to a freedom, can not disclose themselves without being at the same time 'put into question,' for the possibility of overturning the scale of values appears complementarily as my possibility. It is anguish before values which is the recognition of the ideality of values (BN, p. 76).

Thus, the For-itself's nihilating power reveals to  reflective agents not only their freedom to choose their own actions, that is, to define their own individual essence or identity, but also their absolute moral autonomy, that is their independence from all ethical codes other than the one they themselves choose. Such is the gist of the first chapter of BN.
