---
title: "MP"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/MP"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\monas\mp Reminiscing on Merleau-Ponty

Twenty-seven years ago, at the inaugural meeting of the Merleau-Ponty Circle, which was held at the University of Akron, I was invited to reminisce ex promptu on Merleau-Ponty. I had the courage to comply with the invitation. But then I had the impudence of youth, and I had a more or less reliable memory, and my souvenirs of my Parisian years were fresher. Now, in my old age, I have discovered in myself an extraordinary ability to fabulate. Actually, I am afraid that my fabulatory capacity is not inferior by much to that of Salvador Dalí, who devoted a long, detailed first chapter of his voluminous autobiography to what he called his intrauterine memoirs. Of course, speaking to an audience in which there certainly are a number of distinguished deconstructionists, I don't have to caution anybody against the human, all too human and irrepressible ability to generate supposedly autobiographical text out of the blue, or almost. Yet I am too oldfashioned to do that impudently. Thus, in preparation for this talk I decided to control my highly suspect memory by referring myself to some historical events which are certainly not of my own invention.

I arrived in Paris in the summer of 1959. At that time and until his death on May 3, 1961, Merleau-Ponty was teaching only at the Collège de France, to which he had been elected to succeed Louis Lavelle in the chair of philosophy at the end of 1952. Thus I cannot possibly have any other memories of his teaching than of his lectures at the Collège de France from the Fall of 1959 to the Spring of 1961.

As for more private memories, there is only one. I was personally introduced to Merleau-Ponty by Jean Wahl, and I seem to remember that the introduction took place at one the highly intellectual, fascinating parties Jean Wahl threw from time to time at his own home. But was that really the place at which I was introduced to Merleau-ponty? I wouldn't bet my head on it. At any rate, and to my great regret, I am sure that neither then nor ever did I have anything that could even remotely be characterized as a personal conversation with Merleau-Ponty.

To return, then, to the Collège de France, Merelau-Ponty taught two different courses per academic year. The academic year began, I think, by the middle of October and ended in May. In the two last years of his life, which were the ones in which I followed his teaching, the subjects were, as all the people interested in Merleau-Ponty's work well know, one on Husserl and the other on the human body, for the courses of 1959-1960, and one on Philosophy and Non-Philosophy since Hegel and the other on Cartesian Ontology and Modern Ontology for the courses of 1960-1961. Now, I wish I could tell you honestly that I have a vivid memory of the content of those courses. Alas! the sad fact is that not a bit of the substance of those courses remains clearly in my memory. And, as it happens, my personal notes on those courses were lost a long time ago. Right after Merelau-Ponty's death, those of us who had attended the courses were asked to lend our notes for the purpose of reconstructing Merleau-Ponty's teaching work Ponty in his last year. Who asked me for those notes I have no idea; what I know is that I never saw them again. Perhaps my notes contributed something, among the notes of many others, to the reconstructive work carried out respectively by Claude Lefort, translated by Hugh Silverman and published in Telos in the Fall of 1976, and by Alexandre Métraux published in English by North Western University Press in 1972, in a volume entitled Life-World and Consciousness , edited by Lester Embree.   

You may be wondering how I could dare to volunteer to share my memories of Merleau-Ponty with you, given that I don't seem to remember anything at all. If so, you are wrong. For if it is true that I don't remember anything of the substance of his teaching, that you can easily get from books. But what I remember and will share with you I don't think you will find in books.

For some of what I have to say, a little background as to the kind of institution the College de France is will be helpful.

In 1530 the King François Premier, prompted by the famous humanist Guillaume Budé, launched a highly original teaching institution, which for centuries would be deeply resented by the University of Paris. A number of "royal lecturers," as they were known, because they were appointed and paid by the king, were selected among the best to teach certain subjects. Initially, the subjects were Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. Hence the name of "le collège des trois langues." Other subjects, philosophy among them, were added progressively, and under Louis XIII the institution's name became "le Collège Royal de France."  What distinguished this institution, apart of the outstanding quality of the teachers selected, was that the courses were free of charge and open by law to all people without exception, since there were no grades given and no degrees conferred. The royal lecturers were exactly that: just lecturers. Apart from the fact that since 1852 the Collège de France depends from the Ministère de l'éducation nationale, that with the centuries its history has been enriched with the names of the most prestigious French intellectuals, the institution has remained essentially unchanged.

And now, at last, to my personal memories, which refer particularly to the Thursday course of 1960 on the body, but wouldn't vary much in reference to the other courses. Let me begin with the physical setting. It was a large quadrangular room, perhaps it would be better described as a small amphitheater, in which  there were always two policemen standing. The reason for this will become clear in a moment. Merelau-Ponty entered the room through a door that was close to his desk, to which he went directly without saluting. He had an air of profound concentration. He sat at the desk, he set his eyes on no body but, as it were, on the far horizon, and, without the help of any notes, he delivered during an hour the most perfect lectures I ever heard in my life. He had a harmonious voice, which he never raised. His tone was absolutely serene. One impecable, beautifully constructed, marvellously intelligent sentence followed another without fault. He never hesitated, he never stumbled. He spoke as brilliantly as he wrote. If he had been reading a chapter of one of his books it wouldn't have been different. And yet, he wasn't reading, he was not reciting by heart, one actually saw him think. Truly, I repeat, from any point of view--voice, diction, delivery, style, substance--those were the most perfect lectures I ever attended. To this day I still have trouble believing that such level of performance was possible. But I witnessed it. In exactly an hour Merleau-Ponty reached his final sentence, and without saying a word to anybody exited the room through the door near his desk. The fascination was broken.

But now I have to refer to the different kinds of fascination experienced by Merleau-Ponty's audience. As one entered the room in which he lectured, not through the door near the desk of the lecturer but through the doors at the back of the room, one couldn't fail observing a very obvious fact: Merleau-Ponty's audience was composed of three very different types of people. The first three or four rows, the ones close to the lecturer's desk, were occupied by very elegant ladies. Behind them, farther from the desk and separated from the elegant ladies by a no man's land of about two rows, were about seven rows occupied by men and women of no particular vestimentary elegance. And, still farther from the desk and separated from this second group by another no man's land of about two rows, several rows were occupied by very shabbily dressed and positively dirty people, most of them men. It took me sometime to figure out what was going one, though instinctively, from the first time, I had taken a seat in the middle of the room, rather than in the front or the back.

The front rows, I came to realize, were occupied by aristocratic ladies who probably cared little for philosophy and didn't understand much of what Merleau-Ponty had to say, but who were obviously in love with him. Those ladies never took a note. Their eyes were riveted on the speaker. Merleau-Ponty cut a very distinguished figure, and, as I have said, his language and his delivery were outstanding. No wonder that he had a clientele of

fervent admirers of the feminine sex who attended his lectures for the sake of personal extasis.

Behind the ladies, after a no-man's land, was the largest group by far, composed of adults of all ages, all of whom without exception were busily taking notes. Among them I recognized some Professors at the Sorbonne, and many fellow-students. I remember having seen in those rows Jean Wahl and his wife Marcelle, Paul Ricoeur, and Jean Guitton, among others whom either I don't remember now, or I didn't know at the time. This, of course, was the audience to which Merleau-Ponty was really talking, though I am sure that he didn't dislike the ravished looks he got from the front rows.

 Finally, in the back of the room, separated from the professors and the students by another no-man's land of several rows, was the

           
