---
title: "2004-June 1-Linguistic usage-2"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/2004/2004-June 1-Linguistic usage-2.wpd"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v2.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

2004-April-2-linguistic usage April 28, 2004

LINGUISTIC USAGE

“A term which is used symbolically and not signally, does not evoke action appropriate to the presence of its object. If I say “Napoleon,” you do not bow to the conqueror of Europe as though I had introduced him, but merely think of him. If I mention a Mr Smith of our common acquaintance, you may be led to tell me something about him ‘behind his back,’ which is just what you would not do in his presence. Thus the symbol for Mr. Smith –his name– may very well initiate an act appropriate peculiarly to his absence. Raised eyebrow and a look at the door, interpreted as a sign that he is coming, would stop you in the midst of your narrative; that action would be directed toward Mr. Smith in person. - Symbols are not proxy for their objects, but are vehicles for the conception of objects. To conceive a thing or a situation is not the same thing as to ‘react toward it’ overtly, or be aware of its presence. In talking about things we have conceptions of them, not the things themselves; and it is the conceptions, not the things, that symbols directly ‘mean.” Behavior toward conceptions is what words normally evoke; this is a typical process of thinking. - Of course a word may be used as a sign, but that is not its primary role. Its signific character has to be indicated by some special modification –by atone of voice, a gesture (such as staring), or the location of a placard bearing a word. In itself it is a symbol associated with a conception, not directly with a public object or event. The fundamental difference between signs and symbols is this difference of association, and consequently of their use by the third party to the meaning function, the subject; signs announce their objects to him, whereas symbols lead him to conceive  the objects . The fact that the same item –say, the little mouthy nose we call a ‘word’– may serve in either capacity, does not obliterate the cardinal distinction between the two functions it may assume. - The simplest kind of symbolic meaning is probably that which belongs to proper names. A person’s name evokes a conception of something given as a unit in the subject’s experience, something concrete and therefore easy to recall in imagination. Because the name belongs to a notion, so obviously and unequivocally derived from an individual object, it is often supposed to ‘mean’ that object as a sign would mean it. This belief is reinforced by the fact that a name borne by a living person always is at once a symbol by which we think of the person, and a call-name by which we signal him. Through a confusion of these two functions, the proper name is often deemed the bridge from animal semantic, or sign-using, to human language, which is symbol using. Dogs, we are told, understand names –not only their own but their masters’. So they do, indeed, but they understand them only in their capacity of call-names.. If you say “James’ to a dog whose master bears that name, the dog will interpret the sound as a sign, and look for James. Say it to a person who knows someone called thus, and he will ask: ‘What about James?’ That simple question is forever beyond the dog; signification is the only meaning a name can have for him –a meaning which the master’s name shares with the master’s smell, with his footfall, and his characteristic ring of the doorbell. On a human being, however, the name evokes the conception of a certain man so called, and prepares the mind for further conceptions in which the notion of that man figures; therefore a human being naturally asks “‘What about James?’ -   There is a famous passage in the autobiography of Helen Keller in which this remarkable woman describes the dawn of Language upon her mind... - The  sign is something to act upon, a means to command action; the symbol is an instrument of thought... Real thinking is possible only in the light of genuine language, no matter how limited, how primitive; in her [H. Keller’s] case, it became possible with the discovery that ‘w-a-t-e-r’ was not necessarily a sign that water was wanted or expected, but was the name of this substance, by which it could be mentioned, conceived, remembered. - Since a name is the simplest type of symbol, is directly associated with a conception, and is employed by a subject to realize the conception, one is easily led to treat a name as a ‘conceptual sign.’ In a sense, this is justified; yet it strikes a strained and unnatural note, which is usually a fair  warning that the attempted interpretation misses the most important feature in its material. In the present case, it misses the relation of conceptions to the concrete world, which is so close and so important that it enters into the very structure of ‘names.’ A name, above all, denotes something. ‘James’ may represent a conception, but it names a person. In the case of proper nouns this relation of the symbol to what it denotes is so striking that denotation has been confused with the direct relation of sign and object, signification. As a matter of fact, James does not, without further ado, signify a person; it denotes him – it is associated with a conception which ‘fits’ the actual person . The relation between a symbol and an object, expressed by “S denotes O,’ is not a simple two-termed relation which S has to O; it is a complex affair: S is coupled, for a certain subject, with a conception that fits O, i.e., with a notion which O satisfies..- In an ordinary function, there are three essential terms: subject, sign, and object. In denotation, which is the commonest kind of symbol-function, there have to be four: subject, symbol, conception, and object. The radical difference between sign-meaning and symbol-meaning can therefore be logically exhibited, for it rests on a difference of pattern, it is strictly a different function. - Denotation is, then, the complex relationship which a name has to an object which bears it; but what shall the more direct relation of the name, or symbol, to its associated concept be called? It shall be called by its traditional name, connotation . The connotation of a word is the conception it conveys. Because the connotation remains with the symbol when the object of the denotation is neither present nor looked for, we are able to think about the object without reacting to it overtly at all. - Here, then, are the three most familiar meanings of the one word, ‘meaning’: signification, denotation, and connotation. All three are equally and perfectly legitimate, but in no possible way interchangeable. ” (Susanne K. Langer, Philosophy in a New Key: A Study in the Symbolism of Reason, Rite, and Art (Published as a Mentor Book by arrangement with Harvard U. Press, Ninth printing (revised), April 1958), pp. 61-64).

”Then Aristotle says, Let us therefore consider enunciative speech, etc. Here he points out that only enunciative speech is to be treated; the other four species must be omitted as far a the present intention is concerned, because their investigation belongs rather to the sciences of rhetoric or poetics. Enunciative speech belongs to the present consideration and for the following reason: this book is ordered directly to demonstrative science, in which the mind of man is led by an act of reasoning to assent to truth from those things that are proper to the thing; to this end the demonstrator uses only enunciative speech, which signifies things according as truth about them is in the mind. The rhetorician and the poet, on the other hand, induce assent to what they intend not only through what is proper to the thing but also through the dispositions of the hearer. Hence rhetoricians and poets for the most part strive to move their auditors by arousing certain passions in them, as the Philosopher says in his Rhetorica . This kind of speech, therefore, which is concerned with the ordination of the hearer toward something, belongs to the consideration of rhetoric or poetics by reason of its intent, but to the consideration of the grammarian as regards a suitable construction of the vocal sounds..”  ( Aristotle: on Interpretation, Commentary by St Thomas and Cajetan, Translated from, the Latin with an Introduction by Jean T. Oesterle, Marquette U. Press, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 1962, Lesson VII, 5, 17a4).

“... so our most intense feelings of love and fear and grief are likely to be directed at objects and persons who are seen as irreducibly particular in their nature and in their relationship to us ” (Nussbaum, Love’s Knowledge) , p. 83.

“ Good perception is the acknowledgment of the nature of practical situation: the whole personality sees it for what it is. ” (Nussbaum, Love’s Knowledge, (Oxford U. Press, 1990), p.79.

“It is of the essence of propositions that they are expressed by sentences... Wants, states of believing, and acts have no analogous connection with language.” (Nussbaum, Aristotle’s De Motu Animalium (Princeton U. Press, Princeton, 1978), p. 186.

“ And he is also right to make it the job of the same theory to explain both practical and non-practical cases, for these differ not cognitively, but only with reference to the role played by desire. It is perhaps the mistaken notion that epistemology and the explanation of action are, for Aristotle, two different branches of inquiry , that has led many critics to mark off some phantasia contexts from others and to feel no qualms about offering an interpretation for one set that could not fit the other. To move a creature to action, an object must appear to him: he must select it, mark it off, organize it, interpret it. But this is, desire aside, what it is to see. Learning to perceive, as Aristotle tells us, is learning to make distinctions. The passive infant may receive some stimuli, but perception, thought, and action all presuppose the exercise of phantasia ” (Nussbaum, Aristotle’s De Motu Animalium, p. 269.

“The great Subverter of Pyrrhonism or the excessive Principles of Scepticism, is Action and Employment and the Occupations of common Life. They may flourish and triumph in the Schools, where it is, indeed, difficult, if not impossible, to refute them. But as soon as they leave the Shade, and by the Presence of real Objects, which actuate our Passions and Sentiments, are put in opposition to the more Powerful Principles of our Nature, they vanish like Smoak, and leave the most determin’d Sceptic in the same Condition as other Mortals,” (Hume, Concerning Human Understanding, Essay X II, Part II, p.152).

“All law is universal ; but about some things it is not possible for a universal statement to be correct. Then in those matters..., the law takes the usual case , though without ignoring the possibility of missing the mark.” (EN 1137b13 ff. - Quoted by Nussbaum, Love’s Knowledge , p. 69).

“ Socratic knowledge of the good, attained through pure intellect operating apart from the senses, yields universal truths – and, in practical choice, universal rules... The lover’s understanding, attained through a supple interaction of sense, emotion, and intellect (any one of which, once well trained, may perform a cognitive function)... yields particular truths and particular knowledge. It is tempting to try to understand the contrast between,  these two kinds of knowledge in terms of the contrast between propositional knowledge and knowledge by acquaintance. This would, I believe, be an error.  First of all, Socratic knowledge itself is not simply propositional knowledge . Because of Socrates’ constant emphasis on the claim that the man with episteme is the man who is able to give explanations or accounts , the rendering ‘understanding’ is in general more appropriate. Second, both kinds of understanding, not just the Socratic kind, are concerned with truths. Alcibiades is claiming not just an ineffable familiarity with Socrates, but the ability to TELL the truth about Socrates . He wants to claim that through a love’s intimacy he can produce accounts (stories ) that are more deeply and precisely true –that capture more of what is characteristic and practically relevant about Socrates, that explain more of what Socrates does and why– than any account that could be produced by a form-lover who denied himself the cognitive resources of the senses and emotions Finally, there is much about the lover’s understanding that cannot be captured by either model of knowledge, but can be better conceived as a kind of ‘KNOWING HOW.’ The lover can be said to understand the beloved when, and only when, he knows how to treat him or her: how to speak, look,. and move at  various times and in various circumstances; how to give pleasure and how to receive it; how to deal with the loved one’s complex network of intellectual, emotional, and bodily needs. This understanding requires acquaintance and yields the ability to tell truths; but it does not seem to be reducible to either. Alcibiades suggests, then, that there is a kind of practical understanding that consists in the keen responsiveness of intellect, imagination, and feeling to the particulars of a situation. Of this wisdom the lover's understanding of the particular beloved is a central and particularly deep case – and not only a case among cases, but one whose resulting self-understanding might be a fundamental kind of ‘knowing how.’ The lover can be said to understand the beloved when, and only when, he knows how treat him or her; how to give pleasure and how to receive it; how to deal with the loved one’s complex network of intellectual, emotional, and bodily needs. This understanding requires acquaintance and yields the ABILITY TO TELL TRUTHS; but it does not seem to be reducible to either . Alcibiades suggests, then, that there is a kind of practical understanding that consists in the keen responsiveness of intellect, imagination, and feeling to the particulars of a situation. Of this wisdom the lover’s understanding of the particular beloved is a central and particularly deep case – and not only a case among cases, but one whose resulting self-understanding might be fundamental to the flourishing of practical wisdom in other areas as well.” ^(F1)

Philosophy and the representational  language of statements

At least with Socrates and Plato, if not before, Greek philosophy took definitively the linguistic route. But this is not precise enough. After all, unless philosophy were to deal exclusively with the ineffable, which sounds highly problematic, it was bound to take the linguistic route. What is characteristic of Greek philosophy – the Socratic and post-Socratic – is the particular linguistic route it took.

Socrates disputed with friends and adversaries verbally. What was in dispute was not reality directly but reality as manifested through their propositions and their assertions, what they proposed for consideration or asserted as true. Aware that he himself could not be sure of the truth of any of his ideas, Socrates abstained from proposing them for consideration, and even more so from asserting any of them as true, to the intense frustration of his contemporaries and of the 0future readers of Plato’s dialogues.

As long, then,  as either Socrates himself, or Socrates’s friends or his adversaries said nothing, no philosophy was possible, for philosophy essentially linguistic in that it was about the truth of views expressed in hypothetical propositions or definitely asserted as true. Of course, it may be objected that silent, solitary reflection rather than open verbal exchange with others was conceived as a possible way for philosophy by Plato, for at least at a certain time he spoke of thought as “inner speech.” ^(F2) But even the inner speech Plato had in mind was linguistic, for it was composed of silent propositions and assertions without which Plato himself could have not known what he thought or what he believed to be true. Moreover, the silent propositions could be expressed in outer, public language. In short, the particular linguistic route taken by Greek philosophy concentrated on the language of propositions and statements as verbal expressions of possibly true thoughts  or of thoughts firmly held as true.

It may be asked whether any other option than the linguistic one was possible for philosophy. Most certainly, an ineffable philosophy or a philosophy of the ineffable was not an option, for it is inconceivable. However, it should be  pointed out that language is not composed exclusively of propositions and statements. This has been brought to full focus by the modern linguistic school of speech acts. However,  Aristotle was already aware of this fact,  for in the Peri hermeneias he explicitly mentions speech acts that are not enunciative, that is, neither propositional nor  assertive, such as commands, threats, requests, etc., and he excludes them from the field of philosophy because, having no propositional content, they say or enunciate nothing, and therefore cannot be either true or false:

“Yet not all speech is enunciative, but only speech in which there is truth or falsity.... Truth and falsity is not present in all speech, however; a prayer, for example, is speech but it is neither true nor false. Let us therefore consider  enunciative speech, which belongs to our present inquiry, and omit the other kinds,  for the study of these belongs rather to rhetoric and poetics .” ^(F3)

Now, if philosophy is indeed to concern itself with truth and to exclude falsity, as is here matter-of- factly assumed by Aristotle, then philosophy has to be linguistic in the sense of concentrating on enunciative speech, for truth and falsity are properties of enunciative speech that expresses propositionally what the subject conceives or judges to be the case . If what is propositionally expressed, which amounts to what the knowing  mind believes and  judges to be the case, corresponds to what is actually the case, then the statement is true and the knowledge genuine. If not, the statement is false and what the statement conveys is not genuine knowledge.

According to this conception of philosophical language, which is reduced to statements of what is the case, the language of statements aims at expressing faithfully in words what is the case. Moreover,  knowledge is theoretical or purely contemplative, in that the truth expressed has no direct connection with action. The knowledge stated may in certain cases be useful to the satisfaction of desires and, in that sense, be related to action. But the relationship is purely accidental and, at most,  indirect, in that  what is known is independent from whether or not what is known happens to be useful and from whether or not its usefulness happens to be exploited or even grasped by the knower.

For purposes of contrast, let us call this view of the language of statements the representational-theoretical view. This conception of philosophy rests on the assumption of a representational and theoretical view of the language of statements, and implies a theory of

truth as correspondence to what is the case, . That Aristotle held this view is beyond dispute, for he he articulated it explicitly in the Peri hermeneias, and his views on the judgment and its truth conforms to it. It will be my contention, though, that (a) Aristotle’s notion of practical knowledge as terminating in action presupposes different view of the language of statements, to wit: a non-representational and non-theoretical view of the functioning of the language of statements; In this case, instead of being the exception among speech acts,  their functioning is similar to that of all the other speech acts, which are not representational but instrumental. That (b) Aristotle never realized that his notion of practical knowledge presupposed an instrumental view of the functioning of statements which was incompatible with his representational view. That (c), as a consequence of (b), he never felt constrained, as he should  have, to renounce the representational-theoretical view, to his detriment and the detriment of his followers. I will explore these points in connection with Martha Nussbaum’s splendid work on Aristotle’s notion of practical knowledge.

.............

But is the assumption of the representational character of indisputable knowledge as expressed in statements indisputable, on which assumption the nature of philosophy rests? The answer is, in the first place, that the presupposition rests on a long elaboration that began with Socrates and continued by Plato and later by Aristotle concerning the nature of knowledge. The presupposition stands or falls with that epistemic infrastructure. Secondly, the very Aristotelian exploration of practical knowledge by contrast to the theoretical knowledge that fascinated Socrates and Plato suggests the possibility of a kind of philosophy that harmonizes with our actual usage of language better than the linguistic philosophy conceived and defended by Aristotle.

As for the epistemic elaboration on which rests the Aristotelian assumption of the need for the philosophical undertaking to concentrate on enunciative speech exclusively, I’ll be brief and schematic to the point of oversimplification, given that it is abundantly illustrated by the entire history of Western philosophy as it was practiced for centuries. Then I will turn to the really interesting point, which is the alternative to that sort of philosophy.

Socrates , as is well known, waged a furious war against the rhetoricians who dared to educate the Athenian youth without themselves possessing certain knowledge of what is right and wrong. Not being  himself in possession of that kind of knowledge, Socrates could not state it in his disputes with his adversaries or in his conversations with his friends. Thus he faced courageously his admirable death in philosophical silence. However, as shown by the dialogues of  Plato, by his linguistic disputational  practice and by the standards on the basis of which he rejected all the stated positions he came across, Socrates implicitly predefined the ideal of philosophy that Plato would complete and render explicit after him.

Unlike the rhetoricians who reached their positions about the right way of acting, either blindly or guided by the desire to say what was popularly acceptable in their culture, Socrates proposed to be guided not by desire but by the truth known with unshakeable certainty because its necessary truth was rationally demonstrated. Thus for instance, he rejected Euthyphro’s pragmatic definition of piety –doing what is pleasing to the gods– as a poor definition because it did not state the essential traits of piety, what piety in itself necessarily had to be.

Plato took Socrates’ hint and developed it into a ful-fledged epistemic theory. People had all sort of beliefs or opinions, most of them prompted by wishful thinking or culturally conditioned. The rhetoricians criticized by Socrates were no exception in this regard, as evidenced in Socrates’s disputes with them. Perhaps some of their beliefs were correct, but whether or not they were correct they did not know. ----------------------------- Socrates opposed opinions to knowledge – doxa to episteme . Opinion was what might be true or might not be true, but what at any rate was not known with certainty to be true. Knowledge was what was true and was known with certainty to be true , that is, it was known to be necessarily true . That was the sophia to which the lovers of wisdom aspired, the kind of knowledge with which Socrates and later Plato wanted to replace the opinions of the rhetoricians who were in charge of the education of the Athenian youth.

Soon Plato reached the realization that the senses could not be source of necessarilyu true knowledge, for all sensible objects are mutable. Hence, even if the perception of one of those objects happened to correspond to what was the case in reality, it would soon cease to correspond as the object changed and, thus, what was supposedly known by the knower would become false. In short, nothing contingent could be object of episteme , but only of doxa .. Only what is non- contingent, what is necessarily what it is, could be known rather than believed. So much for the sensible world, which Plato excluded from th realm of knowledge.

Now, if such was the case with the sensible objects, then obviously the senses, on t he side of t he epistemic subject, could not fare well with Plato, either. And they did not. The senses were part of

the body, which itself was corruptible, that is, as subject to change as all  other sensible objects.

Side by side with the mutable, material objects, Plato argued, there were the mathematical objects, which not being sensible were immutable. As the mathematician he was, Plato knew those objects and their intelligible, necessary, immutable character. He knew those objects not through the senses, of course, but through another faculty which, though lodged in the body, was not itself bodily but of the same nature as the non-bodily or immaterial objects it knew and to which it was attuned. Plato gave to this superior knowing faculty the name of nous, which, translated into Latin became the intellectus , our intellect. Thus he opposed the intelligible objects, which were not object of episteme , to the sensible objects which could be no more than objects of belief. He opposed the immaterial intellect to the material body in which it was lodged, the emotions and desires of which militated against the pure immaterial vision of the intelligible, non-contingent reality to which it alone aspired.

What was that superior, immutable, non-contingent reality constituted of? Of all the genuinely knowable objects accessible to the intellect. This was the famous Platonic world of the Ideas, which included not only the mathematical objects but also the conceptual or intelligible aspect of the sensible objects – their intelligible Forms. Indeed, the particular extension of any body is itself contingent and, therefore, not object of episteme, but the idea or Form of extension is intelligible. Similarly, the particular white color of a particular sensible object is contingent, but the concept of white is intelligible. These are the genuine realities that constitute the world of the Platonic Ideas. And that world exists because all its constituents are intelligible and necessary. And the very fact that they exist and correspond to our concepts of them guarantees the truth of our concepts.    

Now I do not claim that this cavalier summary of Plato’s views is exact . For one, his views, no less than the sensible objects he despised because of their mutability, changed significantly through Plato’s life. Thus, there is no way to make an exact summary of those views. One would have to repeat them in detail and in the order in which Plato held them. Avowedly, then,  my summary is impressionistic and approximative. But this suffices for my purpose, which is only to delineate the epistemic heritage Aristotle received from his master and some of the major continuities and discontinuities between his views and Plato’s. Needless to say,  my summary of Aristotle’s views will be no less impressionistic than my summary of Plato’s views, and for similar reasons.

By the time of his philosophical maturity, Aristotle had taken his distances from Plato on many points. I will mention only the ones that are pertinent for my purpose.

Unlike Plato, in his search for truth Aristotle did not dismiss the sensible world with a stroke of the pen. On the contrary, he thought that all knowledge begins with the sensible , with what appears sensibly. In addition, he introduced a fundamental distinction that had escaped Plato. The knowledge Socrates had aspired to was practical, for he wanted to know how to live as it befits a human being, by contrast to the rhetoricians who claimed to know without knowing. Having failed, however, to distinguish  practical from theoretical knowledge, Plato tried to attain in matters of practical knowledge the absolute certainty that, as Aristotle came to realize, was possible only in the field of contemplation either of abstract, intelligible ideas, such as logical and mathematical relationships, or in the field of the “natures” of uniform or constant sensible realities. Indeed, as is well known, Aristotle transferred the transcendent  Platonic Ideas into our own world under the form of the “natures” or ‘essences” of the actually existing sensible objects, in those areas in which there is fixity and uniformity. Given the universal and necessary character of the objects of this kind, concerning them Aristotle deemed possible the absolutely certain knowledge or episteme of which Plato had spoken, and he called such knowledge scientific.

Practical knowledge is intrinsically efficacious

Unlike Plato, however, who confined to the region of blind opinion and belief whatever could not be known ‘scientifically,’ Aristotle thought that in the realm of the contingent and particular, that is of the variable and mutable, another kind of no less genuine knowledge was possible. Because this knowledge had to do with action, which is always particular, rather than with the mere contemplation of the immutable objects, Aristotle called it “practical.”

       

Though he had  clearly and significantly taken his distances from Plato, nonetheless for a long while in his philosophical explorations Aristotle persisted in preserving the Platonic view that,  in order to be genuine knowledge, knowledge had to be universal and necessary . This PLATONIC trait of his views was reflected in Aristotle’s initial conviction that practical knowledge involved a combination of a universal judgment, because it was knowledge,  and of a particular juidgment, because it had to do with action. This is the version of Aristotelian practical knowledge to which Devereux paid exclusive attention. Regarding that version, however, I noted the confusion it involves of practical knowledge with practical discipline or already acquired, formulated or stated science. I argued, moreover, that a practical discipline, such as the Aristotelian treatises on ethics and on politics, were not really practical because, in spite of Aristotle’s explicitly stated practical aim in the NE, neither is the knowledge imparted in the Aristotelian ethical treatises necessary to become a virtuous agent, nor are all those who study and master those supposedly practical treatises necessarily virtuous. In short, the knowledge therein contained is not “efficacious,” to use Devereux expression he employs when he distinguishes the science or art of medicine (or ethics) from the practice of medicine. That IS THE sort of medical science taught in schools and books through theoretical statements independently from THEIR practice. ^(F4)

As shown by Martha Nussbaum, the truly distinguishing characteristic of Aristotelian practical knowledge is that it terminates in action. Of course, in the case of the representational view practical knowledge is connected with action, too, for it is supposedly practical, but it is not connected to action in the same way. In the representational view the connection is indirect and accidental, via a previous theoretical and independent comprehension of what is the case, which is a necessary but not sufficient condition for the action, for action may or may not oibtain. As is the case with the perlocutionary speech acts, according to Searle, where the addressee first has to comprehend what is said in order to be able to execute the action, so, too, here: the student first learns the theory by comprehending the statements in which it is expressed; then, in a second and independent step, he or she applies the theory through action. In the instrumental view, by contrasst, the comprehension itself consists in, ans is manifesteed in, action. If there is no action when the means to achieve the desired goal are available to the agent, then there is no practical knowledge, for the knowledge is practical in that it itself terminates in action.

However, as manifested by the Aristotelian texts appealed to by Devereux, ^(F5) it is undeniable that Aristotle actually held the view that practical knowledge was a combination of universal and particular knowledge ignored by Nussbaum.

      

Another significant difference between Aristotle and Plato concerns the role of desire in practical knowledge . For his part, Plato had deemed desire to be intrinsically inimical to knowledge because the only kind of knowledge that was conceivable to him was purely intellectual. Moreover, given that desire and emotion are bodily movements, and that Plato saw the body as a prison of the soul, he could not think but that desire and emotion interfered with knowledge.

Like Devereux, the scholastic medievals borrowed their notion of practical knowledge from the same texts as Devereux , where Aristotle contrasts practical knowledge with theoretical knowledge. Of course, in this view too, practical knowledge is related to action, but not in the same way. In these texts the connection is accidental. What is known in bot h cases is the same. In certain cases, however, though not in all cases, what is known happens to be useful for action. If and when that usefulness is noticed and actually exploited, there is a connection with action. But it is clear that the connection with action that determines that the knowledge is practical is accidental. By contrast, in the Aristotelian texts considered by Nussbaum, practical knowledge is practical in that it itself is efficacious; it is knowledge  in that it results in action. In this case, then, the connection of practical knowledge with action is not accidental; it is the characteristic that defines practical knowledge. If it does not result in action, it is not practical knowledge.

One of the great merits, among others, of Martha Nussbaum, consists in having rescued from its long obscurity the Aristotelian connection of practical knowledge with desire , which alone can explain how and why practical knowledge terminates in action. Nussbaum’s insight was facilitated by the fact that, instead of taking her point of departure for the study of practical knowledge from Aristotle’s explicit references to that knowledge in such theoretical  works as the Metaphysics and the Analytics , as Devereux does and as it had  traditionally been  done, she began with the Aristotelian study of the action of living agents in the De motu animalium.

The title of this work could be translated as “Treatise on the action of animated or living beings.” Indeed, the word ‘ animalium’ doesn’t refer exclusively to animals, but to all animated or living creatures, plants included. It turns out, however, that early on in the treatise Aristotle determines that plants will not be part of the object of his study, for he is interested in the creatures whose action is teleological or for the sake of a goal desired and pursued  by the creature itself, to the achievement of which goal the creature itself adapts its conduct as the circumstances demand.  Thus it turns out to be a treatise on the action of people and animals, which have in common a teleological character.          

The fact that animals and people are here studied together is important as far as the Aristotelian notion of practical knowledge is concerned. The reason is that in the texts studied by Devereux Aristotle had affirmed that both animals and people were capable of practical knowledge, the radical difference between them being  that theoretical knowledge was beyond the ken of animals. However, in the texts studied by Devereux, which are representative of the representational view, ????????????????????, Aristotle’s approach is primarily epistemological. Thus it is for epistemological reasons – to wit: that the object of theoretical knowledge is universal and, therefore, intelligible rather than sensible, that Aristotle places theoretical knowledge beyond the ken of animals, and it is because of the usefulness of the object of practical knowledge for the preservation and perpetuation of the life of the individual and of the species that Aristotle attributes to both animals and people the ability to gain practical knowledge beyond the ken of animals.    

In the De Motu , as underscored by Nussbaum, Aristotle explicitly raises the question why knowledge sometimes terminates in action and sometimes not, and he answers that what makes the difference is the presence or the absence of desire. For knowledge to terminate in action, desire has to be present.  

Much more can  be said in favor of Nussbaum’s idea f Aristotle’s understanding of practical knowledge, not the least of which is the fact that she connects practical knowledge with perception via her superb detailed exploration of the Aristotelian notion of imagination, purified  from its contamination with the idea of resemblant image. I have no need to summarize Nussbaum’s splendid chapters on Aristotle’s views on practical knowledge in The Fragility of Goodness and in Love’s knowledge, in which practical knowledge emerges as “ a  keen responsiveness of intellect, imagination, and feeling to the particulars of a situation .” ^(F6). She is extraordinarily articulate.

Unfortunately, her achievement is partly obscured by her confusion, which replicates Aristotle’s own, of the knowledge contained in Aristotle’s treatises on ethics –to which I want to add the De Motu Animaliums. Aristotle’s treatise on action– with practical knowledge which actually terminates in action.

 of   lack of realization that Aristotle actually had two different and mutually incompatible conceptions of practical knowledge. One of them is the one attributed to him by the tradition that sees in it a combination of universal and particular linguistic propositions , of which Devereux is a representative, and the other is the one attributed to him by Nussbaum, in which the distinctive characteristic of practical knowledge is that it terminates in action.. This lack of realization on Nussbaum’s part is due, I think, to Aristotle’s  and  her own misconception of the way in which the language of statements [DIRECT PERCEPTUAL JUDGMENTS, ORALLY COMMUNICATED PERCEPTUAL JUDGMENTS, WRITTEN STATEMENTS] actually functions. This misconception is reflected in the supposed parallelism between theoretical and practical knowledge involved in the practical syllogism to which   Aristotle has recourse to explain the connection between knowledge and action. Now already in her study of the De motu , and still in  both The Fragility of Goodness and in Love’s Knowledge, Nussbaum’s pays much attention to the practical syllogism in connection with practical knowledge.

I will preface my study of Nussbaum’s interpretation of Aristotle’s practical  knowledge with three remarks. (1) That, as correct ly argued by Nussbaum,  the practical syllogism is used by Aristotle as a device explanatory of action. (2) That being linguistic, the practical syllogism can hardly be used to explain the action at least of animals, because they are non-linguistic creatures. (3) That Nussbaum herself grants the “oddity” of Aristotle’s explanatory use of the practical syllogism regarding the action of animals because of its linguistic character , and she is even willing to sacrifice the analogy it presupposes between theoretical and practical knowledge if its use happens to conflict with our linguistic practices. My three remarks are closely related to each other, so I will deal with them together.

Concerning the Aristotelian view of perception as related to action, Nussbaum rightly points out that, according to Aristotle, perception is always from the subject’s point of view , not from the point of view of an observer of the perceiving subject. Moreover, since, as we already know, desire is the necessary condition for action, the subject’s point of view is, in this case, not the point of view of a contemplator , but the point of view of a desirous agent , that is, the point of view of an agent whom the presence of the perceived  affects with a particular desire or fear –either directly, or indirectly by making possible the conception of a project to be realized– and who responds to what he or she perceives. This is explained by the fact the presence here in question is a presence of exposure of the subject to the action of what is perceived. If I see a lion in the zoo, but I am not exposed to its action because the lion is behind the bars of its cage, I do not fear the lion and, therefore, do not feel like running away and will not run away. On the other hand, if I am a young child without any experience of lions, I may not fear the lion at all and may approach the cage too closely for my own good. In other words, from my point of view, which is the one that counts for my action, I am not exposed to the lion’s dangerous action and, consequently, I don’t run.

Before moving ahead, let us pause for a few observations. As remarked by Nussbaum, the practical syllogism of which Aristotle speaks clearly indicates that he finds a parallelism between theoretical knowledge and practical knowledge . As the knowledge of the major and minor in a theoretical syllogism leads to and results in the knowledge of the conclusion, so the FEAR- knowledge by an agent of, say,  a dangerous object to which he is exposed together with the APPLICATIVE knowledge of the means of avoiding the danger necessarily results in the action through which the danger is escaped. Thus the  necessary connection between the knowledge of the premises and the knowledge of the conclusion, in a theoretical syllogism, is,  parallel to the necessary connection in the practical syllogism between the desire of the end and the knowledge of

the means that constitute the practical premises and the action prompted by their conjunction.

The nature of this practical or “anankastic” necessity has been the object of much study, and Nussbaum reviews in detail the pertinent literature. This examination leads her to contest the necessity of the connection with action in a number of Aristotle’s own examples of practical syllogism and to valiantly  try to modify his theory with the appropriate amendments. For instance, she discovers that if I, who am in Egypt,  want to see my friend who is in Athens – this is the end that constitutes the first premise of the practical syllogism–, and, furthermore, I know that the means to go to Athens is to travel by ship –this is the knowledge of the means that constitutes the second premise –, nevertheless the action of traveling by ship doesn’t necessarily happen as a result. Indeed, what if a ship is not available today, but only in a week? This suggests to Nussbaum that Aristotle should have specified that the action necessarily obtains only if and at the time at which the means are available, so she modifies accordingly the Aristotelian version of the practical syllogism in order to preserve its validity. What, again, to go back to the concrete example we were dealing with of my friend who is in Athens, if, after  I decided to take the ship that leaves tomorrow for Athens, the circumstances change and in the meantime my friend arrives in Egypt? Obviously in this case the action I decided upon will not obtain. And what if...? The list of “what ifs” could be interminable. Nussbaum suspects it, for she comes to seriously question the necessity of the connection of the desired end and of the knowledge of the means with the performance of the action, without which the parallelism between theoretical and practical knowledge presupposed by Aristotle fails to obtain .

In my opinion, Nussbaum’s  examination of the practical syllogism should have led her to reject the parallelism between the practical and the theoretical syllogism and, consequently, to discard the practical syllogism as invalid . But this is a conclusion that Nussbaum hesitates to draw.  The closest she comes to reject the parallelism  is when she remarks the “oddity” of explaining the actions of animals by means of a syllogism, which is necessarily linguistic, given that animals possess no language and, therefore, cannot be led to action by means of a syllogism , as well as when she suggests the difficulty of the Aristotelian attempt to cover with a single undifferentiated explanation the action of people and animals, given the significant differences she remarks. For instance, that animals never deliberate before acting because, unlike people, they have no conflictive desires, and that  their action is always determined not by them but by the strongest desire at the time of acting. In spite of these difficulties, Nussbaum cannot bring herself to part  ways with Aristotle and deny the parallelism between practical and theoretical  knowledge.

  

I think that what ultimately prevents Nussbaum from parting ways with Aristotle is that she doesn’t realize that Aristotle works with two different and mutually incompatible views of the way in which the language of statement functions, and that she herself shares that flawed position. ONE THING IS THE AGENT’S DESIRE WHICH IN THE PERCEPTUAL PRESENCE OF WHAT IS PERCEIVED, IF THE MEANS TO SATISFY THE DESIRE ARE AVAILABLE TO HIM, RESULTS IN ACTION. QUITE ANOTHER THING IS THE CURIOUS PHILOSOPHER’S EXPLANATORY KNOWLEDGE OF THE AGENT’S ACTION BY MEANS OF A DESIRE PREDICATED OF THE AGENT, AS WELL AS A BELIEF ABOUT THE MEANS ALSO PREDICATED OF THE AGENT BY T HE PHILOSOPHER,, PLUS THE KNOWLEDGE, ALSO  PREDICATED OF THE AGENT, THAT THE MEANS WERE AVAILABLE (by definition, since the action already took place, for otherwise there would be no action to explain). ALL THIS IS NUSSBAUM’S AND ARIS’S THEORETICAL KNOWLEDGE WHICH DOES NOT RESULT IN HER ACTION OR ARIS’S, MUCH LESS IN THE AGENT’S ACTION.

---------------------

At least in the case of perceptual statements, the functioning of statements may be conceived in two ways. According to the first way, which is SERLEAN, statements express the subject’s knowledge, that is, a theoretical, objective, factual vision of what is the case in reality. Statements say, and saying is expressing in words that re-present what the speaker views to be the case in reality. Words, then, express verbally what the speaker knows or judges to be the case. If what is stated as known by the speaker does correspond to what is actually the case, then the statement is true; if it does not correspond, it is false. The addressee is expected by to understand or comprehend what is stated and, ideally, to assent to it, thereby gaining the knowledge or vision of reality shared by the speaker. The second way of understanding how statements function is POLANYIAN. Statements do not say what is the case and, therefore, what is said is not meant to be ‘comprehended,’ that is, known, nor assented to; rather they express the agent’s practical knowledge of what is perceived, that is, how what is perceived is to be responded to, given the agent’s desire or project. Therefore the comprehension of what is stated does not consist in gaining a representational  image of what is stated; rather, the comprehension consists in using instrumentally what is said, and is to result and be manifested to others in the addressee’s action in regard of what is perceived. If I tell you, “your sister is on the phone,” the comprehension of what I stated consists in the instrumental appropriation of what is said, which results and is manifested in your taking the phone to talk to your sister, not in your having a mental picture of your sister being on the phone.

How does this apply, concretely, to Nussbaum and to Aristotle? Aristotle has two different and mutually incompatible accounts of practical knowledge. (a) It consists in the grasp of a universal, such as “chicken restores the health of people who have stomach pains,” and the grasp of a particular, such as “this is chicken.”  CF. DEVEREUX. However, this is not practical, efficacious knowledge, for the two  propositions may be assented to as true  without any action following. (b) It consists in the subject’s desire to get cured together with the applicative knowledge of the means, to wit: drinking chicken broth. From this, in the perceptual presence of chicken broth within the subject’s actual reach , the action of drinking (which constitutes the applicative rather than merely theoretical knowledge of the means) follows with conceptual necessity, unless otherwise prevented.

Now, Aristotle never renounced the first and wrong version of practical] knowledge. This resulted in, among other things, his mistaken belief that his ethical treatises were practical, in the sense of being capable of terminating in action (the actual living of the good life). More importantly, the belief in the validity of theoretical knowledge of universals involved in his version of practical knowledge and never given up by Aristotle,  resulted in his pursuing as viable and valid the kind of abstract knowledge by correspondence he actually pursues in such theoretical treatises as the Metaphysics , the Categories, and the two Analytics , among others. This mistake is perpetuated to our grave detriment, and reflected in the prevailing  conception of the experimental sciences criticized by Thomas Kuhn.

As for Nussbaum, she does a great job of rescuing and vindicating the second way of understanding the instrumental functioning of the linguistic knowledge which really terminates in action and eliminates from practical knowledge the idea of correspondence . However, she fails to realize that the representational conception of language, together with the conception of knowledge as correspondence which it presupposes, is different from and incompatible with the instrumental view of the functioning of the language of statements. ( NOTICE: VIEW OF, NOT USE OF, THE LANGUAGE OF STATEMENTS), and is therefore to be totally discarded. As a consequence, she does not quite discard it even from her conception of practical knowledge, to say nothing of her unshaken  reverence for the theoretical works of Aristotle which she never criticizes. Let me explain in some detail these important points.

First, Nussbaum fails to see clearly that Aristotle actually has two different epistemic theories: (1) knowledge as instrument used for the realization of a desired goal, and (2) knowledge as correct representation of what is the case , with the consequent view of genuine knowledge as correspondence with what is the case to validate the representation. Not only does she fail to see this, but she explicitly denies it in attacking those who, according to her, do not realize that Aristotle has only one epistemic theory, the instrumental one. {SEE TEXT QUOTED ABOVE FROM DE MOTU ANIMALIUM, P. 269}. Here Nussbaum is obviously wrong, given the Aristotelian texts on practical knowledge as a combination of universal and practical, as well as the long interpretive scholastic tradition, which she doesn’t even mention.

Second, Nussbaum herself unwittingly  mixes into her view of practical knowledge as instrument for action the Aristotelian view of knowledge-language as correspondence. Indeed, she (the observer who wants to explain, THE ‘THIRD PERSON,’) attributes to animals ‘beliefs-that,’ that is, theoretical beliefs concerning the means to achieve a goal. In fact, however, their supposed beliefs are purely applicative or instrumental. When Kohler’s ape discovers that it can get the banana by using a stick, this ‘belief’ consists in actually using the stick, and in being braced or practically disposed to actually use the stick at the appropriate times  in the future thanks to memory activated by the appropriate situation. So much so that, if in the future the ape doesn’t use the stick in the appropriate circumstances, even Nussbaum would grant that the ape has not the appropriate belief, for the only way her anthropomorphic hypothesis can be meaningful concerning animals is if their action manifests the ‘belief,’ as she admits it herself.  In short, in attributing beliefs to animals,  Nussbaum is speaking of beliefs as mental entities that represent what is the case, which is not the practical or instrumental way in which according to Nussbaum  herself the beliefs involved in statements mean or function.  

Moreover, the same is the case with people, which shows that the difference is not due to the fact that animals are non-linguistic creatures. For, in matters of action, we people do not have objective beliefs that represent and  correspond to what is the case, either. Our supposed beliefs function instrumentally, not representationally. Therefore they are manifested by our actions.

True, unlike animals,  we can verbalize our belief, which gives the impression that it is belief-that, belief about  the factual state of affairs. But such is not the case, for  if the supposed belief is not manifested in the agent’s action of actually employing the means at the appropriate time, it is not what Nussbaum here  means by belief. Indeed, the belief in question has to function instrumentally, that is, has  to be practical, no less than the supposed belief of animals. In short, Nussbaum  makes a  mistake similar to the one Aristotle makes in confusing his representational statements in the so-called practical science of ethics with practical knowledge.

Third, the way she speaks of the impossibility of excluding the existence of the Platonic ideas indicates that she conceives of knowledge-statements as corresponding to what is the case, for what she says is that we cannot know whether there are any Platonic ideas that correspond, given that they are beyond what we can experience.   

..................

 First of all,  Aristotle definitely holds the view that there are two kinds of knowledge: theoretical and practical. Thus, for example, one of the fundamental differences he specifies between people and animals is that people are capable of both practical and theoretical knowledge, whereas animals are capable only of practical knowledge. However, he explains the difference between the two kinds of knowledge in two different and not necessarily mutually compatible ways. Thus, animals are incapable of theoretical knowledge because they have no grasp of universals. However, animals are capable of a sort of universalization  manifested in their actions . Thus, as Aquinas says in his interpretation of Aristotle, animals participate only a little, “ non nisi parum ” in the theoretical knowledge that humans possess in full thanks to their being endowed with intellect and language rather than merely with what the medievals called ‘ vis aestimativa “ typical of animals.  Now, IN ANOTHER VERSION OF PRACTICAL KNOWLEDGE IRREDUCIBLE TO THE FIRST, the difference between theoretical and practical knowledge is that the latter terminates in action whereas the former does not. Hence the question raised by Aristotle in the De Motu as to why knowledge does not always result in action, but sometimes does and sometimes doesn’t. The first version is involves the visual-correspondence conception of knowledge; the second one, the  instrumental conception.

   .................

DEVEREUX AND NUSSBAUM

Devereux credits Aristotle with the discovery of practical knowledge.

The story goes, roughly, as follows. In his search for  knowledge of the appropriate way to live, which the rhetoricians in charge of educating the Athenian youth wrongly presumed to possess, Socrates had looked for essential, that is, necessarily true definitions as opposed to the groundless beliefs or mere opinions of the rhetoricians. A case in point was his rejection of Euthyphro’s well-meaning but purely pragmatic definition of piety as ‘doing on every occasion what is pleasing to the gods,’ but which failed to specify what was evidently and necessarily to be done on every occasion. Plato continued Socrates’ search along the same lines, and ended up postulating the eternal existence of the Ideas. They were the objects that corresponded to the universal essential definitions and thereby guaranteed their truth, the supreme of which Ideas was the Idea of the good. For his part, Aristotle resolutely did away with the transcendent Platonic Ideas. However, he reintroduced them into our own world under the form of the “natures” of the observable realities of our world, in those areas in which there is necessary regularity or “fixity.” Thus, in a certain way, Aristotle vindicated the Socratic intuition that underpinned the latter’s quest for essential definitions. Indeed, Aristotle granted that, in the region of the “natures” of the observable realities, universal and necessarily true knowledge was possible. To that kind of necessarily true knowledge he gave the name of  “scientific knowledge.” However, he criticized Plato for having attempted to attain scientific knowledge in the area that alone interested Socrates: the knowledge how to live as befits a human being, which is practical knowledge. Now, in practical matters, according to Aristotle, scientific knowledge is not possible, for actions are always particular and take place in particular circumstances to which the agent has to pay attention, which is not the case in theoretical matters. Now, though Aristotle dismissed the possibility of  scientific knowledge in matters of action, he nonetheless maintained that practical knowledge is possible, which is genuine knowledge. Thus, in Aristotle’s opinion, Socrates’ and Plato’s error was, not to have looked for knowledge in matters of action, but to have looked for scientific knowledge, which is only possible in theoretical matters.

This, I believe, is, approximately, the story on whose basis Devereux feels authorized to assert of Aristotle’s predecessors that “all of them failed to grasp the fundamental distinction between theoretical and practical knowledge,” and, concerning Plato in particular, that “Platonic dialectic is a confusing blend of the practical and theoretical. Questions about value and how we ought to act are not regarded as different in kind from questions about the ultimate nature of reality.” ^(F7)    

Devereux is convinced that Aristotle was entirely successful in his characterization of practical knowledge as different from theoretical knowledge. In the preceding chapter I voiced my disagreement with him on this point. As I remarked, Aristotle confused practical knowledge with the knowledge contained in the statements of the already constituted practical sciences, such as medicine and ethics. That was a mistake. As pointed out by Devereux himself in his astute distinction between the theory and the practice of a science, the science of medicine , constituted by general statements of what is the case based on inductive observation, but learned in isolation from the healing practice of medicine, is not genuinely practical, for those statements are not “efficacious” in the sense of terminating in action and actually producing health. On the other hand, the particular applications by the medical practitioner of what he or she has learned through the experience of actually treating patients is efficacious, though it should not be by Aristotle’s own requirement of a universal element in practical knowledge. Thus Aristotle failed in his characterization of practical knowledge by contrast to theoretical knowledge.

This brings me to Martha Nussbaum’s interpretation of Aristotelian practical knowledge, which differs from Devereux’s precisely regarding the nature of the connection of practical knowledge with action. Nussbaum insists that what characterizes Aristotelian practical knowledge is, not that it combines universal and particular knowledge, but that it terminates in action. Hence her interest in the supposed analogy between practical knowledge and practical syllogism which terminates in action rather than in mere vision of what is the case.  By contrast, Devereux, following Aristotle’s own explanation in the NE, finds that what characterizes practical knowledge by contrast to theoretical knowledge is not that it terminates in action but its subject matter, which being particular cannot be object of scientific knowledge. Here is Devereux’s explanation of this point, referring to the text of NE:

“A second contrast between practical and theoretical knowledge has to do with subject matter. Theoretical sciences like physics and mathematics are concerned with necessary objects, with things whose principles cannot be otherwise than they are. Practical knowledge, on the other hand, is concerned with the variable and contingent; since such knowledge is practical, it is concerned with actions in particular circumstances, and here there is ‘much diversity and fluctuation.’” ^(F8)

Notice again Aristotle’s confusion of theoretical knowledge with the theoretical sciences, and the correlative confusion of practical knowledge with the practical sciences. In the theoretical sciences, scientific knowledge is possible because their subject-matter is regular; in the practical sciences, by contrast, whose subject matter is action, which is irregular or aoriston , scientific knowledge is not possible. Moreover, the practical sciences are practical because of their subject matter, which is actions in particular circumstances, whereas the theoretical sciences are concerned with necessary objects which cannot be otherwise than they are.

On Aristotle, who after all was Plato’s disciple –and through Plato, Socrates’ disciple–

the Socratic ideal of attaining scientific knowledge, that is, necessarily true knowledge, knowledge through causes, continued to exercise an extreme fascination . No doubt, Aristotle got his first a hint from Socrates’ interest on essential definitions, that is, on definitions that captured and expressed the essence of the being defined. True, Aristotle found himself forced to give up the dream of attaining scientific knowledge in  practical matters, that is, in the realm of action, which alone interested Socrates, because of the particular-variable character of the subject-matter of that knowledge. However, in the first place, he thought that the ideal of necessarily true knowledge could be attained in theoretical matters, in matters in which what was pursued was pure disinterested  knowledge, theoretical knowledge,  the correct intellectual vision of what is the case. For instance, in the realm of the “natures” of the observable regular phenomena, in those cases in which  the regularity could be demonstrated to be not merely accidental but due to the essence itself of the being at stake, which of course could not be the case in the area of action, where there is no fixity or regularity. Secondly, even in the area of action Aristotle affirmed the possibility of practical knowledge, for that was the point of his introducing practical knowledge side by side with theoretical knowledge. But here the very notion of knowledge became equivocal. For in theoretical matters knowledge was propositional ???????? , and it consisted in the correspondence between what the mind conceived and judged to be the case and what was actually the case. When such correspondence could be demonstrated to be necessary, then the knowledge was scientific. In the case of practical knowledge, though, there is no possible correspondence and no possible truth, because nothing is affirmed or denied as known and as to be assented to. In practical knowledge no correspondence is possible because, as acknowledged by Aristotle himself in the Peri hermeneias, only enunciative speech that expresses what the mind conceives and affirms as being the case can be true or false, that is, correspond or fail to correspond to what is actually the case. The expression “practical knowledge” is therefore equivocal, in that knowledge means correspondence with what is the case, and here there is no correspondence involved. Practical knowledge doesn’t result in a statement of what is t he case but in an action, and an action can be appropriate or inappropriate, but not true or false. The action will be appropriate instrumentally, if it involves the use of the appropriate means to attend the end pursued by the agent. So practical knowledge is “knowing how ” to act appropriately, not “knowing that” something is the case. And it is practical in that, under the appropriate circumstances and unless prevented by a factor independent of the agent,  it actually terminates in action .

Aristotle denies theoretical knowledge to animals while he grants it to people, and he grants practical knowledge to both. At least from the linguistic point of view, this seems to make some sense, for theoretical knowledge is essentially propositional or linguistic, and animals are non-linguistic. But this presupposes two things: (a) that Aristotle is right in assuming that people, unlike animals, are capable of theoretical knowledge, which is propositional-representational of what is the case and capable of correspondence. (THIS IS WHAT KANT SHOWED TO BE IMPOSSIBLE, THOUGH HOWEVER INCONSISTENTLY HE PERSISTED IN TREATING IT AS IF IT WERE POSSIBLE IN THE PARTICULAR CASE OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. HENCE THE CONUNDRUM OF THE KANTIAN ‘THING IN IT SELF,’ WHICH IS UNKNOWABLE BUT INDISPENSABLE AS A POINT OF REFERENCE. (b) that practical knowledge, even in the case of people, is non-linguistic, as it is in the case of animals. I think that the two presuppositions are wrong. The first, because it assumes that language, or at least the language of statements, is representational, whereas it actually is instrumental. The second assumes that since no representation is involved in practical knowledge, practical knowledge even in the case of people is non-linguistic, whereas it actually is instrumental, as signs are in the case of animals, which are prompted to action by the thing-sign. The comprehension of a sign is not propositional or predicative; the sign’s comprehension is manifested in action in response to the existential or active presence of that which is signaled by the sign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

^(F1) Martha C. Nussbaum, The Fragility of Goodness: Luck and ethics in Greek tragedy and philosophy, (Cambridge University Press, London, New york..., 1986), pp. 190-191.

^(F2) Sophist ,263a.

^(F3) VII, 17a2, 17a4, 17a5. Translation Jean T. Oesterle, 1962.

^(F4) Comparable to the science of geometry taught in the books of geometry as to be assented to, independently of the practice of problem-solving

^(F5) Curiously, however, as we shall see, Nussbaum for the most part ignores the Aristotelian texts appealed to by Devereux in which Aristotle speaks distinguishes explicitly practical from

theoretical knowledge. Moreover, considering the general views on science in the Metaphysics and the Analytics , she will try to apply to them her improbable view that Aristotle always held the doctrine that theoretical knowledge was no different from practical knowledge. (See De Motu , p. 269).

^(F6) The Fragility of Goodness, p. 191.

^(F7) Daniel Devereux, “Particular and Universal in Aristotle’s Conception of Practical Knowledge,” Review of Metaphysics, (39, March 19086), p. 483.

^(F8) Ibid ., p. 485.
