---
title: "97-APR-2"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1997/97-APR-2"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

97-apr-2

The question of truth concerning faith

"And the argument presented here raises numerous questions about the persuasiveness of the position that I have maintained Lindbeck and Aquinas basically share, however differently they articulate it" (Bruce D. Marshall, "Aquinas as Postliberal Theologian," in The Thomist , 1989?, p. 402).

In the above quoted article Marshall writes:

"As I have already mentioned, Aquinas defines truth as a correspondentia or adaequatio of the mind and reality... My concern is not with this definition  of truth, nor with the ways Aquinas develops and qualifies it when he discusses the limited correspondence that can obtain between our minds and language and divine reality"

(Ibid., p. 370).

"All kinds of questions can of course be raised about how this notion of correspondence or adaequatio should be understood more precisely, and about whether this notion can support a feasible account of human knowing. But the question raised by O'Neill and others is simply whether Lindbekck's overall view of truth can possibly include this notion, which seems to express a basic Christian conviction  that in some deep sense, the faith is true to reality" (ibid., p. 359).

I believe that Marshall is right in attributing to Aquinas this view of ontological truth. * My difference with him is, in the first place, that while his concern is not with this definition of truth, mine is. Secondly, while he acknolwedges that numerous questions can be raised about the persuasiveness of the account of faith he attributes to Aquinas, he himself does not raise any questions, whereas I intend to do precisely that.

* "Ontological truth" seems to refer to the purely ideal, abstract, atemporal region of undifferentiated "beings" to be known, that is, assented to as "real." It is in this purely ideal space that O'Neill, who argues for the ontological truth of "Christ is the Lord," wants to place that fact-reality. Can the same be said of Aquinas, whose world includes agents with objective, natural goals, but whose intellectualism leads him to identify the cat of faith with a judgment whose truth consistis in correspondence with reality?

To articulate my argument as succintly as possible. Acording to Aquinas faith is an intellectual act of assent, that is, a judgment. If so, it has to be true or false. Now, the truth of any act of the mind can only consist in a certain correspondence of the mind with reality, however the correspondence may be defined. Hence, the validity of faith as an epistemic act that aims at correspondence with its object hinges on this correspondence. Well, my point,  is that Aquinas's conception of faith as an epistemic act, which entails the applicability to it of the notion of truth as well as the consequent necessity of justifying the correspondence, is wrongheaded. In other words, my view, in its NEGATIVE ASPECT , is that faith is not an act that consists in assent and aims at correspondence with reality. In fact, it is not an epistemic act at all, if knowledge is understood as representation. It is, rather--and this is the POSITIVE ASPECT of my view--closer to what Aristotle called practical knowledge (minus his intellectualism, which leads him to make it primarily into an intellectual virtue or disposition), a prudentia as dispositional implicit project and implicit realization of free project in theologial orthopraxis.

I will begin with the positive aspect, for there is no way to escape a paradigm without having what promises to be a better alternative.

The positive aspect

We attribute knowledge to animals. * So did Aristotle. On what basis? Their adaptive, appropriate behavior. If knowledge consisted in something purely internal and unobservable, this attribution would be unwarranted. We wouldn't distinguish the burning behavior of fire, which is not cognitive, from the hunting behavior of a lion. But behavior is not purely internal and unobservable. Hence we don't need to have the experience of being the knowing animal in order to feel entitled to attribute knowledge to animals.

* Who is this we who attributes knowledge to animals? We have to distinguish the reflective, disengaged, contemplative, curious about the validity of knowledge, we who speaks about animals, from  the interacting we harrassed by a barking dog, who throws a rock at the dog and sees the dog react and braces himself for the next move depending on the dog's reaction. Actual knowledge is nothing else than the exposed agent acting in view of a desired future state of affairs. It aims, on the agent's part, at instrumental appropriateness to bring about the desired state of affairs, given the available means and depending on whether or not the agent has the initiative.

Is there a "picture" involved here? If so, the picture is instrumental like a map for action rather than representational. It certainly is not factually or objectively representative, but rather practical, for the barking dog is affectively grasped as delendus or fugiendus. And it is irremediably relative, for it is self-referential to the good of the exposed agent--delendus or fugiendus mihi , depending on my goal. This is dramatic space , the pluri-centered, pluri-lived dramatic space in which each agent-patient is situated toward the future as producer and receiver of effects, the space of care.

The ideal, abstract, atemporal space of geometry; the abstract, measurable, instrumental space-time of physics that applies to the physical universe; the geographical-temporal time of past historical events (implicitly seen from our present); the  

coordinated, measured time-space of our shared world, always grasped from the here and now of each center from which distances unfold--all these are undramatic objectifications, useful

map-instruments for control and self-understanding in relation to the world and to others; none of these is the dramatic space of interaction we inhabit as agents-patients and within which we actually act.

A second point. We don't attribute knowledge to plants. Now, a plant that behaves heliotropically behaves in an appropriate way, that is, in a way that contributes to the flourishing of the plant. Yet we don't attribute knowledge to the plant (because in our interactions with plants we do not have to brace ourselves in respect of them as agents, since they don't respond as agents * ).

* To use Nussbaum 's language in Aristotle's De Motu Animalium

(1979, p. 75), the plant's behavior happens or is for the sake of y, but  the plant doesn't do it for the sake of y. "The way the  food-getting mechanism functions in a lion is via the lions beliefs and desires. A plant takes in food that comes into contact with it; it does not have to perceive it, form beliefs about it, of go to get it. Some might argue that animals are, in much the same way, creatures of blind response, automata whose motions are to be explained by simply citing the stimuli to which they are exposed. I argue that even the lowest animals, the 'incomplete' creatures who have only 'indefinite' motions, must, if they do move from place to place, be described as intentional systems: their phantasia of the object, and not simply an OBJECTIVE characterization of the object, is what enters into the best EXPLANATION of their motions. If they see the meat as meat, they will go towards it; if they mistakenly believe it to be some harmful substance, they will run away. Their desires, their view of the object, and their beliefs about what must be done if the object is to be attained, determine the course that they will follow" (p.p. 86-87). "If the... causal account in terms of antecedent desires and beliefs is to be a genuine alternative to teleology, it must be possible to identify the desire and the belief independently of the goal. To ascribe to the window-smasher a desire to smash a window and a belief that if the window is to be skmashed a rock must be thrown is to give a teleological account: we begin with a goal, and show how the agent does what is, in the circumstances, necessary to realize it. The desire and the belief are not genuine Humean causes. The connection between them and the goal is a logical or conceptual one; the relevant characterization of the motivating desire must contain a reference to the goal (as seen by the desiring agent)" (p. 88).

Thus what we call knowledge is related not to any kind of appropriate behavior but to a particular kind. Which one? A behavior of an organism that is sensitive to pleasure and pain and is guided as to its behavior in pursuit of its flourishing by sensitive feedback. Sensitivity is the basic distinction between animals and plants, and what we call knowledge is related to sensitivity. [ Automatic, voluntary, deliberative... See Nussbaum, ibid., particularly pp. 77, 86-88, 133, 222, 231, 232, 261, 265.]

I jump a step to come to a problematic point. What we have so far identified as knowledge is connected with motivation and action, even in the highest case of deliberation and self-motivation to act in view of a certain good-goal. Yet what Aristotle calls speculative knowledge (as if knowledge were a genus of which speculative and practical are species), and what Aristotle makes into the paradigmatic case of knowledge because of its "precision" which involves universality and necessity is not motivating by itself, is not connected with action, is pursued for its own sake as the kind of contemplation in which the intellect finds its specific good (the contemplation of the real) and is purely objective or concerned exclusively with the character of its object rather than with the flourishing-happiness of anybody. Hence, three questions. (1) From where does this conception of knowledge arise? (2) Doesn't the name"knowledge" amount to an equivocation, given the radically different characteristics of both? (3) Is the notion of speculative knowledge legitimate?

(1) Aristotle inherited the view of speculative knowledge from Plato, for whom only the unchangeable, universal and necessary qualified as genuine knowledge. Therefore the sensible was not epistaton (knowable) but only object of opinion. Only the intellect could know. Furthermore, the passions (feelings and desires) were positively excluded from Plato's conceptionof knowledge because they were connected with the body and they obscured knowledge; hence pure intellectual desire to know, not utility.

To Plato the idea that animals know would have been totally aberrant and abhorrent. Mathematical knowledge, geometry in particular, was the prime model of knowledge for Plato, among other reasons because it appeared to him as universal and necessary grasp of forms. (Significant equivocations may be involved in the designation "mathematical knowledge": the process of geometric knowing (heuristic), the pieces of knowledge objectified in statements, the systematic corpus of knowledge objectified in Euclid's geometry, the process of teaching the already acquired geometry).

Aristotle never entirely discarded the Platonic notion of knowledge, though he had or progressively came to have a different anthropology and he modified the idea of speculative knowledge accordingly. However, episteme--universal and necessary knowledge--remained his ideal, so that he could compare the imprecision of practical knowledge to the precision of scientific knowledge. He brought the essences (through abstraction) to the temporal sensible world. He was far less strict than Plato as to the legitimacy of particular, sensible, factual, unwarrantable but nonetheless real knowledge. He realized that the good was necessarily relative and, therefore, that in matters of action (practical knowledge) universality and necessity were impossible. Furthermore, he realized that practical knowledge did not terminate in vision but in action, and that he object of practical knowledge was motivating , and that practical knowledge did not demand verbalization (and therefore objectification?) (see Nussbaum, ibid. pop. 186-7 and 215. YET HE CONTINUED TO SEE AN "OBJECT" INVOLVED IN PRACTICAL KNOWLEDGE, RATHER THAN A MOMENT IN A PRACTICAL PROCESS. AND HE CONSIDERED PRUDENTIA AN INTELLECTUAL VIRTUE, A MATTER OF PRACTICAL JUDGMENT , THAT IS, OF KNOWLEDGE, OF GRASPING INTELLECTUALLY (THOUGH NOT 'PRECISELY') WHAT IS GOOD AND RIGHT, FROM WHICH APPROPRIATE ACTION NORMALLY FOLLOWS (EXCEPT IN THE CASE OF 'AKRASIA'), RATHER THAN A MATTER OF DESIRING OR AVERTING APPROPRIATELY THROUGH PROJECT AND ACTION. *

*  The appropriation is not only in terms of the object that motivates, as is the case with animals and instinctual behavior , but also of the desiring-averting agent. Here the agent has to bring himself or herself to choose the right action whether or not sensibly or spontaneously desiring or averting it, and the action ideally has to be not only instrumentally efficient but satisfactory, happiness-fostering (according to the standards of the intersubjective community?).

Where does vision enter here? Vision in the sense of objective mirroring correspondence that terminates in mere unmotivating assent or assentful vision, WHICH UNDERLIES THE CLASSICAL NOTIONS OF KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH , nowhere. Hence, if this is the kind of vision involved in what Aris calls  "practical knowledge," there is no knowledge here, intellectual or other, for there is no mirroring-correspondence.
