---
title: "97-AUG-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1997/97-AUG-1"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\97\97-aug-1 August 1, 97

KIERKEGAARD AND AFTER-POSTMODERNISM

I remember one of those frequent conferences on the future of theology, two decades ago, where my table-mate was the late Abraham Heschel. For the most part, the great Rabbi sat quietly, but, toward the end, he spoke almost wistfully:

It has seemed puzzling to me how greatly attached to the Bible you seem to be and yet how much like pagans you handle it. The great challenge to those of us who wish to take the Bible seriously is to let it teach us its own essential categories; and then for us to think with them, instead of just about them.

At the time, this seemed as quaint a comment as Barth's familiar phrase about 'the strange new world within the Bible.' And yet, as the years have worn on, I have come to think that what we had heard was a sort of charter for a hermeneutical approach that would be more and more relevant in a postliberal age (Albert C. Outler, "Toward a Postliberal Hermeneutics," in Theology Today (-----------), p. 290.

Anyone who wishes to deal with Soren Kierkegaard's life must take care not to burn his fingers--it is so full of contradictions--so difficult to get to the bottom of that character...--he struggled to remain clear to himself, but he was driven along by every possible kind of mood and was such a man of moods...--he seized hold of everything and turned it about in every way, looked at it from every side, and reflected... ("From Israel Levin's recollections," quoted by Alexander Dru, The Journals of Soren Kierkegaard , Oxford U Press, London 1938, p. 562).

But to require the greatest possible subjective passion, to the point of hating father and mother, and then to put this together with an historical knowledge (NOT WITH A HISTORICAL RELATION TO A HISTORICAL), which at its maximum can only be an approximation--that is the contradiction ( Concluding Unscientific Postscript, Princeton 1941, p. 509).

The venerable old man with his faith seemed to be an individual with an absoluetly justified grievance, a man whom existence had mistreated, because a modern speculation, like a change in the currency, had made property values in the realm of faith insecure. His sorrow over the loss of his son... through speculative philosophy, moved me profoundly; while the contradiction in his position, that he could not even explain how the enemy had conducted the campaign, became for me a decisive challenge to trace out a definite clue.... This was something for me. And I thought to myself: '... you must have something to ccupy your time. Here it is: to discover where the misunderstanding lies between speculative philosophy and Christianity.' This therefore became my resolve... But chiefly I sought by reflection to trace the misunderstanding to its roots. My many failures I need not here recite, but finally it became clear to me that the misdirection of speculative philosophy, and its consequent assumed justification for reducing faith to the status of a relative moment, could not be anything accidental, but must be rooted deeply in the entire tendency of the age. It must, in short, doubtless be rooted in the fact that on account of our vastly incresed knowledge, men had forgotten what it means to EXIST, and what INWARDNESS signifies. - When I understood this, it also became clear to me that if I desired to communicate anything on this point, it would first of all be necessary to give my exposition an indirect form. For if inwardness is the truth, results are only rubbish with which we should not trouble each other. The communication of results is an unnatural form of intercourse between man and man, in so far as every man is a spiritual being, for whom the truth consists in nothing else than the self activity of personal appropriation, which the communication of results tends to prevent. Let a teacher in relation  to the essential truth (for otherwise a direct relationship between a teacher and a pupil is quite in order)... ( Ibid ., pp. 215-217).

A recent announcement of a philosophical conference reads, in part, as follows:

Postmodernism brought much that we wish to retain... It made visible the economic, political, gender, and colonizing hegemony inherent in western 'objectivity' and 'universality.' Postmodernism puts the recognition of the ungrounded variety of assumptions first ...

It is a postmodern contribution to begin from this awareness...

But what is the effect? For the most part it results in arbitrariness, stoppage, an inability to think further. Overcoming this effect is the topic of our Conference. We want to think further, to begin a discourse that moves on, after postmodernism.

Does Kierkegaard have anything to contribute to this attempt to surpass postmodernism without returning to an impossible premodernism or modernism? I think so, if one knows how to dig.

Like an involved criminal case: 1

Long before the postmodernists, well even before Nietzsche, Kierkegaard had raised his powerful voice against the conception of knowledge within which the notions of objectivity and universality are pivotal. He called that conception "speculative philosophy" or "speculative thought." We shall come to that in a moment.

The fact that Kierkegaard not only was a Christian but that all his writings are in one way or another a meditation on  the Christian faith makes him suspect to the majority of the postmodern thinkers. Indeed, one of the typical features of postmodernism is precisely its distrust of anything that involves lofty claims to truth, not to speak of claims to revealed, infallible truth. Yet, precisely on this point Kierkegaard would claim some kinship with postmodern thinkers, for he himself waged a mortal war against

the truth of Christianity. Actually, it was the realization that Christianity neither was nor could possibly be true that led him to his own brand of postmodernism. But what makes him particularly interesting for us is that his postmodernism didn't result in arbitrariness or stoppage. How come?

Kierkegaard waged his war against the truth of Christianity on several fronts. He opened the earliest front as a student at the university, where under the influence of Hegel the idea of surpassing the mythical Christian faith of the ignorant by decanting it into firm philosophical knowledge was all the rage.

Though K himself was initially enthused by that idea, it didn't take him long to realize that the Hegelian attempt failed completely, for the rational Christianity of what Kierkegaard despectively called "the System" had nothing to do with the Christian faith with which K had been deeply familiar since his chilhood. The Christian faith, K began to suspect, precisely because it was faith was forever excluded from the domain of knowledge, of guaranteed, scientific truth.

Needless to say, K did not infer from the particular failure of the Hegelian attempt the universal conclusion that the truth of the Christian faith could not be object of knowledge. After all, he had grown up in a Copenhagen in which not only the official line but also the common conviction among the professors of theology and the preachers was that the Christian faith was, if not strictly rational in all its aspects, at least not irrational, and that certain of its central features, such as the existence of God, were not only object of faith but also of knowledge. Moreover, K happened to live precisely at the time at which the historical method had come of age and reached scientific respectability, with the cultural consequence that the idea of the historical verifiability of the truths at the origin of Christianity was much in vogue. In fact, as shown by two of K's most important works, Philosophical Fragments and Concluding Scientific Postscript , he was to consider very seriously such claims before finding them wanting and discarding them.

To make, then, a long story short, K's reflection led him to the clear conviction that the Christian faith was exactly that, a faith, and that it neither could NOR SHOULD be justified rationally, for it would cease to be faith.

There is little doubt that this discovery shattered Kierkegaard when he was a student in Berlin. An entry in his diary concerning the realization that "philosophy and Christianity cannot be united" (OR RECONCILED) shows how close he came to chucking Christianity out the window as a result of this discovery. ^(F1) Had he end up doing that, he would have followed the path of innumerable reflective Christians who coming to realize that the Christian faith, contrary to what they had been told, simply does not live up to the demands of reason, resolutely opt for reason and cease to be Christians. K's originality, however, lies in the fact, that confronted with this dilemma, he refused to give up his faith.

It would seem, at least at first sight, that the difference between K and the just mentioned Christians is that the former acted irrationally whereas the latter act rationally. K himself, at least in certain of his expressions, might seem to support this interpretation, since he himself took what looks very much like a perverse pleasure in insisting on the absurdity of the Christian faith. It is my contention, however, that the case is more complicated than this. K came to label it the case of "the misunderstanding between Speculation and Christianity" [Lowrie, II, 301] . He found it so baffling that he compared it to "an involved criminal case where the great complication of the situation makes it difficult to apprehend the truth" [ibid.] , and avowed that in his attempt to solve the case he had had "many false starts" [ibid.].

Kierkegaard and postmodernism

The unexamined life is not worth living. One can heed this as the call of rationality and resolve, like Descartes, that only that  deserves to be accepted which cannot be doubted. If one is a radical thinker and pushes the exercise to its bitter end one reaches the conclusion that everything can be doubted, except perhaps one's own existence--whether in the body or out of the body one doesn't know. But, then, since nobody can live in such rarified, ethereal state, since, as K remarked, not even philosophers can inhabit the castles of ideas they build, one becomes more modest in terms of rationality. For most reflective people (for the non-reflective go on with their naïve certitudes without the slightest suspicion of their own naïveté) this boils down, concretely, to dismissing all religious faith as purely mythical and clinging to the truths of the hard sciences, whatever those truths happen to be at the time . Of course, these radical thinkers remain commonsensical realists, without inquiring too seriously whether their realism squares or not with the truths of the hard sciences. In short, the only point concerning which they take in all seriousness the call of rationality is religious convictions, with the result that the only real victim of the decision to be rational is religion [Wolterstorf] . This applies as well to postmodernist thinkers in their practical life, though in their theoretical life they at least remain disturbed by the inconsistency between their rational convictions as thinkers and their practical life as agents, and therefore look for a theoretical way out that entitles them to something more solid and satisfactory than de omnibus dubitandum est.

As so many other thinkers, Soren Kierkegaard found himself confronted with this very problem. During his years as a student at the university of Berlin he came to the dreary realization that, contrary to what he had been led to expect in the bland Christian-rationalistic environment of his native Copenhagen, "Christianity and philosophy cannot be united" (another translation reads reconciled rather than united) [see note 1 above] . As so many other thinkers, on the occasion of this discovery Kierkegaard felt deeply tempted to chuck his faith out the window and opt for remaining rational. In the end, however, he resolved to remain a Christian.

The verdict on K's case seems to impose itself: he chose to be irrational. In fact, K himself seemed to support the credibility of this verdict, since he described the Christian faith as a rationally unwarranted "leap" and insisted on the absurdity of the very Christianity to which he adhered in faith.  It is my contention, however, that the expressions in K's works which may seem to support this verdict are simply an equivocation due to the fact that K himself was groping for his way concerning a very complex matter, but that in the last resort he would have rejected the verdict. His claim, in my opinion, would be that the very standard of rationality by which Christianity was judged and with which it was expected to comply was wrongheaded.   

The fact that, in the verdict just mentioned, Christianity appears as irrational, and that this coincides with the negative view of Christianity commonly acepted among intellectuals makes this verdict to be taken as an incontrovertible matter of fact. By the same token the claim I am attributing to Kierkegaard has to appear as phantastic and, at any rate, uninteresting. Who, after all, among the self-respecting intellectuals, is passionately interested in the religious validity of Christianity, assuming that the expression itself "religious validity" makes any sense?  Consequently, the very idea of exploring whatever K may have had to say in support of the claim I am attributing to him can have very little appeal nowadays. The perspective may change dramatically, however, if it is realized that, as Wolterstorf has maintained, what in the eighteenth century apperared as the isolated rational crisis of religion, and of Christianity in particular, has become a generalized epistemic crisis from which not even the hard sciences are exempted. In fact, is not postmodernism, with the arbitrariness and stoppage that result from it (not to call it by its proper name of skepticism) the obvious manifestation of such generalized epistemic crisis? Now, if such happens to be the case, then perhaps the alternative found by Kierkegaard for the particular case of Christianity may too, in one way or another, be generalized. In which case, needless to say, Kierkegaard's investigation becomes enormously interesting and important. What, indeed, if he offers us the basis for the "after-postmodernism" we are looking for today?

Like an involved criminal case : 2

K set himself as a goal to find out how and why people who devote thenmselves to the intellectual life are particularly prone to lose their religious faith without even knowing how and why and while even considering such a loss a gain. For, as K would come to realize it, from the point of view of the intellectual who strives for knowledge, faith can only end up being seen either as an illusion, and then the loss of faith is a passage from ignorance to lucidity, or as solid knowledge, and then faith has ceased to be faith. However, this realization on K's part would come as a result of a long, laborious process, for he himself, misled by his bland Christian-rationalistic culture, had devotefd himself to the intellectual life in the hope of elevating his Christian faith to the level of proven knowledge.

This personal experience in the practice of the intellectual life in connection with faith made K confident that he would be able to find out how and why the intellectual life could prove alluring to people of faith as a means of progressing in their faith, when in fact it was bound to be the very trap on which they would lose their faith. He recognized, however, that the task he had set for himself was an extremely difficult one. Actually, he alluded to his "many false starts" [II, 301] in his endeavor, and acknowledged that "The whole thing appealed to me like an involved criminal case where the great complication of the situation makes it difficult toapprehend the truth" [ibid.].

In time, as he gained a degree of clearness on the nature of his task, he described it as the effort "to find out wherein lies the misunderstanding between Speculation and Christianity" [ibid.].

Now, there is overwhelming evidence throughpout K's works that what he had in mind by "Speculation" was concretely the Hegelian system, which happened at the time K was a student at the university of Berlin and throughout his entire life to be the dominant philosophy to which intellectuals were attracted. In fact, in describing the occasion on which he set for himself his task, K doesn't speak of speculation in general but of "a modern speculation," by which he unequivocally means the Hegelian system, what he often referred to simply as "the System." However, as we shall have the opportunity to see, the speculation with which Christianity is in misunderstanding cannot by any means be reduced to the Hegelian system exclusively.

As for the difficulty of the case to whose solution K decided to devote his energies, it might be useful to begin by indicating one of its most complex aspects. It has to do with the kind of discourse in which the solution itself can and should be pursued.

and communicated.

The analogy of faith and speculative knowledge

Aristotle distinguishes between speculative and practical thinking. Speculative thinking is motivated by the pure desire to know, while practical thinking is guided by other interests. The former is therefore purely objective, in that the pure desire to know what is to be known directs it, whereas the latter is subjective in that it is directed by other desires or interests of the knower. Another way of putting it, speculative knowledge is the knowledge gained or to be gained by a subject who stands in relation to the object to be known as a mere contemplator, since no personal interest attaches the knower to that object (after all, the words "speculation" and "spectator" have the skame root, speculation being the knowledge of a spectator or contemplator), whereas practical knowledge is pursued by a subject who knows not as a purely objective knower but as an interested agent.

I will hazard as a first approximation that "the misunderstanding between Speculation and Christianity" (though K himself never pinpointed it in exactly this way) consists in mistaking the Christian faith for speculative, disinterested, merely objective knowing. Of course, this first approximation needs much unpacking.

Let us begin with the act of faith. How is the act of faith usually conceived and spoken about? By analogy to an act of knowing. As through an act of knowing a subject gains knowledge of an object, so that the subject thereby becomes in actuality a knower and the object becomes actually known, so, the analogy goes, through an act of faith a subject gains a sort of 'knowledge' of God, with the result that the subject thereby 'knows' God, as it were, and God becomes, 'known' by the subject. Avowedly, the act of faith is not literally an act of knowing, but only analogous to it, since in the case of knowing what is known becomes evident, whereas faith is obscure, based on authority rather than on evidence. Nonetheless, the result of the act of faith is analogous to the result of the act of knowledge, in that through the certitude of the act of faith the person of faith comes to stand in relation to God in a way similar to that in which the knower stands to the object known through the act of knowing. [ Notice that the analogy is with speculative knowledge that results in assent and involves no other desire thand the speculative desire to know, not with

practical knowledge that results in action and is "desirous knowledge" ].

The question may be asked what the knowledge possessed consists in. Philosophers are the ones who have usually asked this question. Now, for all their variety, their answers tend to coincide in affirming that knowledge is a sui generis, epistemic or intentional adequation of the knower to the reality known.

Most often, this adequation is further explained in terms of similarity (or at least an isomorphism)between the knowledge possessed by the knower and the reality known, in which similarity truth is said to consist. Needless to say, the same applies analogically to the case of faith.

It is important to observe that the just sketched conception of knowledge doesn't involve the interests of the knowing subject in any way. In fact, it implicitly excludes them. Indeed, since knowledge consists in the adequation of the knower to reality, not in the adequation of reality to the wishes of the subject, any affection or desire on the subject's part would necessarily interfere with the knowing activity. Sheer objectivity, therefore, that is, pure adequation to the object, to the exclusion of the subject's subjective desires and interests, is of the essence of the knowing activity.

Does this imply that practical knowledge, which is not for the sake of knowing but of satisfying the subject's interests, is impossible? To answer this question we have to clarify the relationship between knowledge and action that obtains in this view. What prompts the agent to act is a subjective need manifested under the form of desire. Desire, however, is always desire of something, and for the desire to be efficacious, that is, to be satisfied, that which is desired has to be real rather than merely imaginary and to be attainable by the subject who desires. Knowledge informs the agent about the object, since knowledge consists in adequation to the real. Then, if there is no desire or interest on the subject's part, knowledge is not followed by action. If, on the other hand, there is desire, action follows the knowledge of object. This is to say that, whereas action is subordinated to, or dependent on, knowledge, knowledge is independent from action. For knowledge obtains whenever the epistemic adequation of the subject to reality obtains, whether or not an action follows that knowledge. By contrast, efficacious action cannot obtain, except by chance, but on the basis of knowledge. In other words, the relationship of action to knowledge is intrinsic, for it is of the essence of action to be based on knowledge, whereas the relationship of knowledge to action is extrinsic, in that knowledge is complete in itself without action and is not essentially ordained to action.

As for the distinction between speculative and practical knowledge, according to this view, the very idea of practical knowledge is excluded, if by practical knowledge we understand an intrinsic subordination of knowledge to the subject's desires or interests. For knowledge is knowledge, and desire or interest play no role in knowledge. Im fact, as we know, they would positively interfere with knowledge, since knowledge consists in the purely objective adequation of the knower to reality. But this amounts to saying that knowledge is always speculative, purely objective, for the sake of attaining the real, whether or not the real corresponds to the subject's desires or interests, not for the sake of satisfying any desires or interests. The most that may be said, to make room for practical knowledge, is that sometimes knowledge serves the subject's interests and is followed by action, while sometimes it is not followed by action. In both cases, however, what is known is the same and knowledge is by itself independent from action. Thus, concerning knowledge itself, the denomination "practical" is purely extrinsic. Action is conditioned by knowledge, so that one may distinguish between blind and enlightened action. But knowledge is not conditioned by action. *

* I seems, by contrast, that what Aris has in mind when he speaks of practical knowledge, at least in the Rhetoric and the Ethics , is a knowledge that is informed by desire, a "desirous knowledge," to use Nusbaum's expression. This knowledge is intrinsically related to decision and action, and assent plays no part in it. Later I will return to this point, which implies a totally different conception of practical knowledge. But if this is so, speculative and practical knowledge are mutually exclusive. In other words, not only is the word knowledge strictly equivocal, in that it suggests two species of the same genus, but if either of them is what knowledge is about, then the other cannot be knowledge.  

If now we apply this view of knowledge to the case of faith, it follows that the act of faith yields a purely speculative, disinterested, merely objective quasi-knowledge of God. Yet whether or not God is loved or even to be loved, whether or not the agent acts or even should be disposed to act in response to Him, will of course depend on this quasi-knowledge, for otherwise the love would be objectless and the action unmotivated. However, faith will be faith just by being this sort of quasi-knowledge, regardless of whether or not it is followed by love and by action.

Such a conception of faith, needless to say, may sound very odd to Christians. LUTHER would perhaps be satisfied with the merely extrinsic connection between faith and works, but he would definitely fail to recognize his faith in a loveless act of knowledge and the God of Christianity in the God of philosophers-- a mere object of assent. AQUINAS , for his part, and Catholics with him, would fail to recognize their salvific faith--and how can faith be genuine without being salvific?--in a loveless and purely internal faith without action. And yet, curiously, both Luther and Aquinas would recognize something of their respective views on faith in this view. Luther the salvific character of faith itself without actions. Aquinas, the extrinsic character of love and of the contribution of the will in the act of faith (cf. de Lubac), as well as the basis for his distinction between dead and live faith. This may be taken as an indication that the faith they live is at odds with their philosophical understanding of it. For his part, K would consider both of them victims--at least philosophical victims, since ultimately they stand by their faith and are willing to sacrifice philosophical coherence--of "the misunderstanding between Speculation and Christianity"--and would see in Luther's and Aquinas's confusion a symptom of the pervasiveness of the misunderstanding and of the complexity of the criminal case to be solved.    

A few scattered clues and indirect communication

K speaks of his "many false starts" in his attempt to solve the problem. Actually, one may wonder whether he ever left totaslly behind the stage of false starts, since nowhere in his works does one find a definite, well articulated formulation of the solution of the criminal case. Wherein exactly lies the misunderstanding betwee Speculation and Christianity? How is it to be overcome? What one finds is an unsystematic accumulation of clues concerning speculation and its opposite [what is the opposite of speculation?], which for all one knows may be just a series of false starts. To determine whether or not that is how things stand with K we will have to consider those clues.

I begin with the clue regarding "indirect communication," for I think that it wll help us to understand K's maddening elusiveness. I was just accusing K of having left us with an unsystematic accumulation of clues rather than a clearly stated solution. I think he would agree. Only, he would point out that he did that on purpose, that in fact he couldn't have done otherwise, because the very nature of the case reuired "indirect communication."

Now, in this connection, I would be the last to deny that K suffered from a pathological inclination to multiply the veils under the pretext of the need for indirect communication. His numerous aliases, the disconcerting multiplicity of pseudonyms as well as the enormous importance he attributed to his pseudonymity are cases in point. He himself in his late years, when he wrote The Point of View of my Work as an Author (1849-1850) and On my Work as an Author: Two Discourses at Communion on Friday (1850), seems to have come to realize that he had carried too far the game of hiding, to the point that he had simply disconcerted his readers rather than bringing them to the point where he wanted to conduct them. Yet, for all his exaggerations in this regard, K wouldn't ever have come to deny the need for, and the importance of, indirect communication in his works. So let us begin by exploring this area.

Precisely in the passage in which he tells of the occasion on which he set himself as the goal of his life to "find out wherein lies the misunderstanding between Speculation and Christianity," he  speaks of the need for indirect communication in this particular case:

It is not necessary to recount my many false starts; but it finally became clear to me that the error of Speculation, and the presumptive right it based upon this to reduce faith to a subordinate factor, was not something accidental, but that it lies deeper in the whole tendency of our age--must indeed be traced to the fact that with their much knowledge people had entirely forgotten what it was to EXIST and what INWARDNESS means.

When I had comprehended this, it became at the same time clear to me that, in case I wanted to communicate anything of the sort, it was of the utmost importance that my views should be presented in the indirect form. For if inwardness is truth, results are a mere baggage which people should not burden one another with, and the desire to communicate a result becomes an unnatural form of intercourse between man and man, inasmuch as every man is spirit, and truth consists precisely in the self- activity of appropriation, which a result only tends to prevent... [Lowrie II, 301-302].

There is much here that is uselessly complicated and, at any rate, irrelevant for my purpose which is to gain whatever can be gained from K concerning the issue to which he devoted his life. What we have to retain from this passage in this connection is that the excess of knowledge had led people to forget that to exist is and what inwardness means, and that in order to lead people to the realization of what to exist is and what inwardness means K needed to use indirect communication, for inwardness is truth, and truth consists in appropriation, not in results. What does all this mean? Is this itself a piece of indirect communication? Does one need to understand this in order to be a Christian?

We should realize that rather than communicating to others K is here attempting to explain to himself what the father of the man who had lost his faith deceived by modern speculation could not understand, and what the man himself who lost his faith didn't quite get, viz., that by bringing him to take an objective stand on the object of his faith, and by presenting the known (i.e., the objectified) as the ideal, speculation had already fatally misled him concerning faith. "People become objective, they insist upon regarding objectively the fact... that God was crucified" ( Lowrie, II, 310 ), because they want "eternal certainty, whereas existence must be content with a figthing certainty" (ibid.). "Modern speculation, like a depreciation of the currency, had rendered dubious the security of his investment in faith" [ibid.] . How so? Through their much knowledge people felt entitled to reduce faith to a subordinate position. Impressed by their own progress in knowledge, people imagined that they would be doing a service to Christianity by transferring it from the the realm of popular superstition or myth to the order of firm knowledge by means of philosophical demonstrations and historical proofs. Now K was himself a Christian and also a knowledgeable person, an intellectual. He himself, in the course of his university studies, had been strongly tempted by the idea of converting Christianity into knowledge. Actually, however, his reflection had led him to the conclusion that "Christianity and philosophy [that is, knowledge and the identification of the real  with the rational, with the known] cannot be RECONCILED" [Lowrie, I, 111]. In other words, modern speculation, like a depreciation of currency, seemed to have rendered dubious the security of his investment in faith. Such, precisely, must have been the situation in which the man who lost his faith found himself. Why, then, didn't the same happen to K when he found himself in the same predicament? Because, unlike the man who lost his faith, K saw through the deception of modern speculation that placed Christianity in a subordinate position to knowledge. [Barth]. Indeed, if in order to be acceptable and valid the Christian faith had to qualify as knowledge, then it was in a subordinate position to knowledge. Philosophy, not revelation, was the ultimate arbiter. However, K's Christian instinct reacted strongly against such subordination, which amounted to submitting God's revelation to human standards and, in so doing, constituted "a direct denial of the most essential element of the Judeo-Christian revelation: God's transcendence" [Dupré, K as Theologian, p. 39].

Had K just stuck by his Christian faith in  the name of God's transcendence, he could legitimately be considered as an example of fideism, that is, of a blind adherence to Christianity at the price of his own rationality. Now, certain of K's own expressions as "the leap of faith" and the "absurdity" of Christianity may seem to justify this accusations. I will come later to such expressions. What in the present context seems to me clear is that K did not stuck by his faith blindly. After all, didn't he argue that speculation involved a forgetfulness of what to exist is and what inwardness means? And doesn't the Unscientific Postscript  amount to an at least indirect--unscientific, because it cannot be scientific!--argument against speculation and, again at least indirectly, in favor of lleaping into Christianity? These are, indeed, some of the scattered clues of which I spoke above and which I propose to consider now. For it is my conviction that K   undertook a very  serious exploration of the nature of the Christian faith and of the appropriate way of adhering to it by contrast to the deception of speculation, out of which faith emerged not as epistemically valid (that would be knowledge) but as a risky, deliberate, appropriate response of love to the loving reliable God. What obscures this fact is--to return to my point--that this exploration (?) had to be indirect in that it shouldn't lead to direct results to be merely assented to, and that the results themselves couldn't be doctrines, for doctrines result from speculation and constitute pieces of direct communication. In short, the whole of K's job had to be unscientific.  

It is importanrt to be aware of the fact that K was carrying out simultaneously a double task. On the one hand, he wanted to help his readers as well as himself to be-come Christians. This he came to see more and more clearly as a matter of personal decision rather than of intellectual assent, a deliberate choice of oneself in relation to God in response to God's self-revelation in Christ--a unique choice, because it is a choice of faith in faith. The fact that it was a matter of personal decision, not of intellectual ability, implied that the correlate of the act of faith was not an objective 'fact,' not even a universally acceptable and necessary doctrine, in short, not a piece of knowledge, but a Respondendum, a reality of the order of exposure in faith. Hence the very attempt to transform Christianity into knowledge was a wrongheaded, quasi-categorical or paradigmatic mistake, whose counterpart was a wrongheaded gearing of the believer toward the One believed in. In addition, the attempt to transform Christianity into knowledge logically led to religious skepticism, for Christianity as a piece of knowledge was insufficient to command unconditional assent. (Much less to motivate the absolute risk of his or her life that thebeliever has to incur. Yet it was a mistake that appeared eminently persuasive to Christians, for without committing it Christianity seemed to be a groundless whim and the Christian act of faith an obscurantist fideism. Thus reflective Christians found themselves in an impossible situation: darned if you do becasue doing leads to the loss of faith, darned if you don't because failing to commit the mistake leads to the realization of the rational groundlessness of Christianity. Once faith was conceived epistemically, Christians were bound to lose the game, even in their own eyes: either blind obscurantists, or lucid atheists.

Parenthetically, certain intellectuals who were people of faith, like Saint Anselm and Aquinas, but who had fallen into the trap of conceiving of faith as something of belonging in the epistemic order, had taken an intermediate position in order to escape from this dire dilemma. They adhered to faith and were disposed to continue believing even if what they believed couldn't be transformed into knowledge, and even if it seemed to contradict the truths reached through reason; but they wanted to see whether and to what extent the truths of faith could become knowledge, and to transform into knowledge all those truths of faith that could be known rather than simply believed. In this way, faith preserved its supreme position and even might show its at least partial rational groundedness. If the latter happened to obtain, this would be to the benefit of Christians and of Christianity; if it didn't obtain, nothing essential would be lost, though no positive benefit would be gained, except perhaps a greater lucidity as to the nature and the status of faith. This decision to stick by faith no matter what is the point expressed in the Anselmian-Augustinian dictum "Non enim intelligo ut credam, sed credo ut intelligam," to which of course Aquinas adhered too.

A couple of remarks concerning this "intermediate position" are in order. Is it true that nothing essential would be lost if none of the truths of faith could have been converted into knowledge? Perhaps that is true in Anselm's case, but certainly not in Aquinas's, if we are to be guided by the way in which they express themselves. For the latter works on the explicit, stated assumption that faith and reason have to be in harmony, since God cannot permit a genuine contradiction between them. The notion of the double truth is, according to Aquinas, psychologically untenable and incompatible with the Christian faith. Only the view of the compatibility of the beliefs (assents) of faith and of reason, whose counterpart or correlate is the view of a whole of reality as a picture in which the sacred and the secular coexist with each other and complement each other harmoniously , is acceptable from the point of view of the Christian faith. Moreover, given this postulated harmony, if concerning those truths on which faith and reason touch each other (the famous " praeambula fidei ") there were no possibility of converting faith into knowledge by demonstrating those truths, faith would then be positively groundless, that is, irrational, and fideism would be in order, which is obviously against the plan of the wise, loving God who created pleople desirous of knowing and the entire universe.

Aquinas, then, cannot really countenance the idea of sticking by faith even if it doesn't square with reason and even if faith happens to be rationally groundless. For Aquinas these are purely conceptual possibilities, since he sees thethe harmony between faith and reason as an implicit component of the Christin faith.

The most that Aquinas can admit is apparent contradictions between truths of faith and truths of reason or provisional groundlessness. And Anselm himself, I think, under the strength of Aquinas's arguments concerning the necessary harmony between faith and reason and the necessary rational groundedness of faith, would have ended up conceding that if the truths on which faith and reason touch were undemonstrable, then faith would have to be given up. [See Delhougne, pp. 309-367].

My second remark refers to the fact that this intermediate position assumes the very thing that K would reject, to wit: that faith is analogous to knowledge and that Christianity is a doctrine or a collection of doctrines. In other words, the holders of this position, K would argue, have already fallen into the trap and are among those at risk of losing their faith or falling into what would be for them an unacceptable fideism. To them, therefore, among others, K would address their work and with them would he communicate indirectly. But what is indirect communication, and why is it necessary?

The difficulty of giving a clear answer to this question arises, at least in part, from the fact that the need for indirect communication is related to the nature of faith, but K himself doesn't seem to be quite sure of the actual nature of faith. Indeed, at different times his analysis moves in different directions which are not necessarily consistent with each other.

Direction 1 : The Christian faith cannot be demonstrated. Why not? Because the object of the Christian faith involves particular, historical events, and events are not objects of demonstration, precisely because they are particular and contingent. Moreover, demonstrations deal with what is purely intelligible, that is, with concepts. But existence is not a concept. Hence the existence of the historical events involved in the Christian faith cannot be demonstrated. As for historical proofs, historical investigation can at best reach the purely factual shell but not the genuine object of faith, for it can lead only to probable knowledge--a mere approximation--not to the certainty of faith on which one can risk one's life. Thus philosophical theology or theological philosophy are condemned to failure, for there is no possible rational grounding of the Christian faith. Comment : In pursuing this direction, K retains the traditional analogy between the order of knowledge and the order of faith. Indeed, the object of faith is object of assent, but that it can only be believed, not known.

Direction 2 : The object of faith cannot be demonstrated. Why not? Because it is absurd. The Infinite becomes finite, the eternal becomes temporal and historical. Hence the mode of appropriation of it cannot be assent with evidence, not even belief without compelling evidence, but belief against evidence. One "leaps" out of the rational order and assents to the object of faith not only without evidence but against all evidence.   Comment : This view preserves the analogy between faith and knowledge. Hence this acceptance against the evidence, however, still places faith within the epistemic order, conceives faith as an epistemic act , for it defines faith as the reverse of knowledge, as a sort of anti-knowledge. Indeed, the object of faith remains object of assent: one believes it against the evidence, that is, one assents to it against the evidence.

Direction 3 : Not only the object of faith cannot be demonstrated, but it is totally extraneous or allogeneous to the the epistemic order. In other words, the object of faith is neither knowable nor unknowable, neither rational nor irrational. Thus the fact that it cannot be demonstrated is not a failure on the part of faith. Rather the expectation that it could or should be object of knowledge or demonstration proceeds from a miscategorization of faith, a radical misunderstanding, a paradigmatic misunderstaning.

In other words, the assumption itself of the analogy between faith and knowledge is wrongheaded.

Faith is analogous to action and practical knowledge

But, then, if not epistemic at all, what sort of order is the order of faith? And is there an analogy between the order of faith and any other region of human experience?

As we saw, one of the reasons given by K for the need for indirect communication is that in the case of Christianity it is not a matter of results. If it were, then direct communication would be in order, obviously because what direct communication communicates is results. Since we are in the order of knowledge, results are what results out of knowing, namely, pieces of knowledge, that is, either facts perceived or doctrines to be assented to. What speculation yields, then, is pieces of knowledge which are communicated communicated through statements, and statements express objects for assent. However, this is what K disputes in the case of faith. The correlate of the act of faith is not something to be assented to, for it is neither a fact nor a doctrine, and therefore it cannot be appropriated through speculation, as philosophers and even theologians have tried to do. Therefore, too, (the object of) faith cannot be communicated directly through ostensive and demonstrative statements, as philosophers and even theologians have tried to do, but only indirectly.

An important indicator of what K is talking about is his insistence that the mode of appropriation, in the case of faith, is not assent or belief but passion. [This is the correlate, on the subject's pole, of the fact that the object of faith is not something to be seen and assented to]. Now, in the traditional epistemic vocabulary the word passion has a bad press in that it suggests blind impetus. Not only is not passion a cognitional act, but it sometimes disturbs and denatures the cognitional process. Only when guided by the knowledge that it itself can neither generate nor possess, since it is not a cognitional factor, can passion be acceptable. However, what K means by "passion," precisely because the word in his idiom neither belongs within, nor is to be understood in relation to, the epistemic order, is not meant to name something irrational (against reason) or a-rational (deprived of reason, that is, without reason when it could should be with reason).

Independently of all epistemic connotations, the word passion suggests that there is something to be passionate about, that is, something intensely desirable or undesirable to the subject on the object's part, so that pursuance or avoidance of the object by the subject may be involved. Provisorily, then, let us say that one of the characteristics of the order of faith is that it involves affection. This is a first hint that in the order of faith the relationship of the subject to the object is is not that of knower to knowable-known but rather akin to that of lover to lovable--loved.

Now, in the classical characterization of the epistemic order affection is either positively excluded or at least not included. In other words, in the knowing process the subject's affections are either an obstacle or at least irrelevant. Why? Because knowledge is meant to be objective, that is, exclusively determined by the object as something to be contemplated, as something unrelated to the exposed subject, so that the subject's feelings shouldn't intervene in the process. In fact, in the epistemic order affections are  "feelings," that is, blind, surd, purely subjective experiences, not attitudes-towaard. To say, therefore, that one of the characteristics of the order of faith is that it involves the dimension of affection is to say that it is totally different from the epistemic order, that there is no analogy whatsoever between faith and knowledge, that in the order of faith subject and object are not related to each other as knower to something to be known at all.

If such is the case, however, the very words "subject" and "object" are highly equivocal, since in the epistemic order they stand for knower and known and in the order of faith for something totally different, so far characterized only as lover-lovable-loved. In the order of knowledge objectivity is everything and subjectivity is excluded. This means, concretely, that the object known or to be known is what counts, and that the subject doesn't count. Indeed, that is why the knower's affections are to be excluded. Not so in the order of faith, where the object is lovable and to be loved, where the loveliness of the object is a constitutive of the object and is meant to appeal to the subject's personal capacity to love and can only be 'grasped' by being loved by the subject (not by being understood or seen). Here, then, the subject's singular subjectivity, his or her own very personal affective response to the object are in part constitutive of the faith relationship.

But of what kind of response are we talking about in the order of faith? Well, we know that it is an affective response of the subject to the object. However, there is a relationship of appropriateness between the response and the object: for the response is love because the object is lovable; were not the object lovable, the response of love would be inappropriate. Furthermore, the subject's love is love of the lovable object. By this I mean that in loving the object of faith the subject grasps the object of faith as lovable, for the response is response of love only becaause the object is grasped by the subject as lovable, so that the love is really love of the subject instead of being a surd, blind feeling caused by the object but not directed to it.

Let us be precise, though, concerning this grasping of the object's loveliness by the subject, for it is not an epistemic act, such as grasping that 2 + 2 = 4. As already explained, an act of knowing is purely objective, mere adequation of the mind to the object, and therefore excludes the subject's affectivity. But love is an affection. So it cannot be an epistemic act. nonethelesss, love involves a grasp of the loveliness of the object, for without such grasp the subject would have no more motive to love than to despise or to hate. So the grasp involved in the order of faith, by contrast to that of the epistemic order, is of not of the type "I see or understand," but of the type "I love you because you are lovable, if you were not lovable I wouldn't love you, so that loving you constitutes the very grasping of you as lovable."

(To illustrate the point. Could I a man find a woman very attractive without being attracted by her at all,  or even when being repulsed by her? And how can the woman's attractiveness be grasped otherwise than by being attracted to her? In other words, no knowing act, that is, no act of the epistemic (objective, contemplative) order would be capable of grasping the attractiveness of a woman. But this is to say that there is a way of grasping that is not of the epistemic but of the affective order, and, correlatively, that there are objects or realities that are inaccessible to knowledge and accessible only to affective acts (not surd feelings, but intentional attitudes that constitute the object by constituting the subject in appropriate relation to the object). I grasp a dangerous object by fearing it, and if I don't fear it when exposed to it its dangerousnees escapes me completely. Actually, if the object is indeed dangerous and I don't fear it, I am in dire danger.

This last point leads us a step further, for it connects affection with action. I grasp the dangerousness of an object by fearing it. But fearing it is not only grasping the dangerousness of the object but simultaneously and correlatively grasping myself as endangered by the object. And is not fear grasping the object as to be avoided or suppressed? Indeed, fear is not only an internal attitude toward an object, but of such a nature as not to be complete in as an internal attitude but to want to terminate in action, in action in response to the dangerous object, in appropriate action, that is, in avoidance or suppression of the dangerous object. A fear that wouldn't involve the intention of avoiding or suppressing the object wouldn't be fear. And an intention of avoiding or suppressing the object that wouldn't, when poossible, terminate in the actual action of avoiding or suppressing the object wouldn't be genuine fear.

To return now to K, it is my contention that, although he did never put it in so many words, his position implies that the order of faith is not analogous to the epistemic order but to the order of action. To spell this a little more, the faith relationship is not to be understood after the epistemic relationship, in which the object is registered objectively, but after the affective-active relationship in which a lovable object is to be responded to as such affectively and practically.

Remaining tasks concerning the particular case of faith

Of course, to say that it is analogous is not to say that it is identical to but that it is comparable to, that attempting to understand the order of faith by comparison to the order of knowledge is wrongheaded and leads to a serious misunderstanding of faith, and that the order of faith can only be correctly understood by comparison to the order of intentional action. Now, since the order of faith is only analogous to but not identical with the order of intentional action, of practical knowledge, we need to complete our investigation by exploring:

(1) the way in which K saw the uniqueness of the order of faith.  For clearly we are situated in relation to God in a unique way (Deum nemo vidit unquam), and his love for us--He being God and we his creatures--has to be of a unique kind, and therefore  accessible to our grasp in a unique way. K was very sensible to that, as shown by the need of "the leap of faith," that is, a uniquely risky decision, and of " infinite passion."

(2) Precisely because the leap of faith is not an epistemic leap but a leap of love, epistemic categories such as blind, irrational, absurd, don't apply to it. Hence to speak of K as a fideist is inappropriate and wrongheaded.

(3) Yet we persist in understanding the leap in epistemic terms. For this K himself is at least partly to blame. Indeed, two of the three "directions" followed by K (see above) indicate that K himself didn't quite realize that faith does not belong in the epistemic order. In other words, he himself didn't quite overcome "the misunderstanding" he desperately wanted to dispel. So the work here is to dispel the misunderstanding more thoroughly than K did. Aris on rhetoric and on practical knowledge, as K suggested at least once. (All knowledge is practical... Why indirect communication? Because statements are objects for assent, like doctrines, and K wanted to "gear" or "brace" people for faith-love, not for assent... Yet there is the question of the historicity of the Christian faith, of the historical "trace," or at least the documnentary historical trace (direct and indirect). But this doesn't send us back to contemplative, theoretical knowledge. Distinction between knowledge of the past to which others were exposed but to which I have not to respond, and 'knowledge' of that to which I have to respond... But if indirect communication is required, why direct communication (philosophical reflection) in the Postscript ? Doesn't K become one of the Dons he so strongly criticized and so cruelly caricatured? And didn't he thereby favor his falling in their hands and becoming just object of papers? No, that is part of the speculative misunderstnding. K's reflection is reflection of a man of faith on his own faith in order to avoid the misunderstanding by deispelling it insofar as it can be  dispelled, and in this way to contribute to reduplication, whereas "the Dons" reflect impersonally or objectively on the Christian faith and avoid reduplication (much as the Parsons avoid reduplication by exhausting themselves in purely aesthetic, emotional reduplication).  

   

------------------------------------------------------------------------

^(F1) See Lowrie, vol. I, pp 11 ff.
