---
title: "97-DEC-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1997/97-DEC-1.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


\wp\97\97-dec-1                         December 8, 1997
      "The focus of modern discussion of this text has been the place of neo-
      Platonism in Augustine's life and  writings.  The  polemic  has  moved
      between two poles: the attack on the plaster saint, beginning with the
      observation that his 'Christianity' was, at  least  for  an  important
      period in his life, very like a specific non-Christian philosophy, and
      the defence, surrendering much of the plaster  but  insisting  on  the
      authentic  Christian  essence.  All  parties  seem  to   have   agreed
      unthinkingly on the principle that  'Christianity'  is  in  the  first
      instance a  body  of  intellectual  propositions  about  God  and  his
      creatures and about particular events in the history of the  relations
      between God and his creatures. On that view, movement into and out  of
      'Christianity' is a matter of intellectual discussion and  assessment,
      ending in assent or disagreement. If you believe in the Virgin  Birth,
      you are a Christian in a way that someone who offers liberal  quibbles
      is not. Arguments for and against the existence of God are  essential,
      and philosophy is the handmaid of theology. To argue  that  philosophy
      has dictated to  theology  tends  to  undermine  the  authenticity  of
      theology.
      "In  this  nektwork  of  assumptions,  Augustine  dealings  with   the
      Platonists  call  his  theology  into  question.  For  one  period  of
      Augustine's life, from his public conversion to Christianity  in  386-
      387 to his ordination as a  Christian  cleric  in  391,  the  evidence
      viewed on those assumptions could be described in ways  disturbing  to
      traditionalists who--sharing those fundamental assumptions  about  the
      nature  of  Christianity--were  in  a  weak   position   to   respond.
      Augustine's views appear so neo-Platonic as to be  Christian  in  name
      only... To make the case (as Alfaric did)  was  to  subvert  the  self
      consciousness of the Latin Catholic tradition... Boyer's orthodox book
      in response... was not at  its  strongest  when  it  came  to  awkward
      historical facts.  Courcelle's  book  found  middle  ground:  allowing
      plenty of  room  for  Christianity,  but  insisting  on  the  Platonic
      disposition of that Christianity.
      "The drawbacks of the traditional assumptions are evident on their own
      terms...
      "But does anyone think that Christianity is a thing of the mind  only?
      Perhaps in Paris, but surely not semper, ubique, ab omnibus. By way of
      thought experiment, consider only an orthodox  Reformed  view  of  the
      matter. The question for that  view  is  whether  and  when  Augustine
      acquired the theological faith that is  the  substance  of  salvation.
      Such a view might by sympathetic to the most  anti-Catholic  parts  of
      the French debate (surely the dalliance with the platonicorum libri is
      not where we should see Augustine becoming a Christian), but would  be
      more inclined to accept  the  paradigmatic  conversion  of  the  Milan
      garden  scene  as  authentic.  But  do  the  Platonic  doctrines  then
      entertained and held for years afterwards in some way  compromise  the
      integrity of that theological faith? On available evidence,  no  clear
      judgment is possible.
      "The defects of both the  Protestant  and  Catholic  modern  views  of
      Augustine and of this text encourage us to look for alternatives.  The
      one that has proved most useful in the present work is easily  stated.
      For Augustine, and for late antique men and women generally,  religion
      is cult--or, to use the word we use when we approve  of  a  particular
      cult, religion is liturgy. Anti-clerical Parisians and Protestants may
      agree that priestcraft is dangerous stuff,  but  Augustine  would  not
      concur with them. The central decision he makes in the period narrated
      in the Confessions is, not to believe the doctrines  of  the  Catholic
      Christians (that is important but preliminary), but to present himself
      for cult initiation--and the  threshold  there  is  a  matter  not  of
      doctrine but of morals...
      "Why do we downplay cult initiation for Augustine? There  are  several
      reasons, beginning with our own  prejudices.  Few  modern  scholars...
      hold a view of the importance and efficacy  of  cult  acts  that  even
      remotely approaches the visceral reverence  for  cult  that  all  late
      antique men and women felt. We like to believe that there were  serene
      and cultless philosophers in that age...
      "... What is clear is that cult was decisive for him: without cult, no
      Christianity. But he was prepared to be very  lenient  on  matters  of
      doctrine; error alone has rarely been sufficient for  excommunication;
      it is contumacy that draws anathem. He surely admitted to full  church
      membership many ordinary citizens of Hippo for  whom  halting  recital
      frm memory of the Apostle's Creed and Lord's Prayer marked  the  upper
      limits of their capacity to master the verbal formulae  of  their  new
      cult.
      "To take such a view of Augustine's religion is perhaps only  possible
      for a post-modern reader, one who has learned  afresh  from  the  most
      recent generation of Parisians that the map is not the territory, that
      the narrative is not the event, that a text is not a life...
      "A text is not a life: so far, so good. To narrate one's past life and
      deeds is to put  a  pattern  of  words  next  to  a  life  (by  nature
      patternless, full of event and incident) and to declare that the words
      and the life have something to do  with  each  other.  'Something'  is
      probably the rightword. Later in this introduction, we shall  see  how
      the pattern of words that appears in the Confessions had  been  taking
      shape in Augustine's texts for years before  this  text  was  actually
      written. The Confessions offer no unedited transcript, but a  careful,
      rhetorical presentation. But the writing of this text was itself  part
      of Augustine's life. 'Confession' for Augustine, that act  of  'making
      the truth', as itself an important part  of  his  religion,  somewhere
      between doctrinal disputation and cult  act--perhaps  even  forming  a
      link between the two..." (James J.; O'Donnell, Augustine: Confessions,
      I: Introduction and Text (Clarendon Press, Oxford 1992, pp. xxv-xxx).
      "'aliud putabam:' Here is the most explicit statement we  get  of  A's
      'Christian Platonism, measured by the defects of his Christology.  The
      view A. recalls to disown  includes  wholehearted  acceptance  of  the
      literal truth of Gospel narratives about Jesus'  deeds.  Only  in  the
      interpretation  of  those  narratives  did  he  differ  from  orthodox
      views... He does not say here how far he was conscious at the time  of
      the gap between himself and orhtodoxy, and once again he describes his
      difficulty as lying mainly in his  misunderstanding  of  the  orthodox
      position, not in his inability to accept  that  position  ('ego  autem
      aliquanto...'). - A. does not mean  by  all  this  merely  a  lack  of
      precision in the formulation of  doctrinal  statements.  To  know  the
      authentic Christ is to 'embrace' him, to be renovated by him, to reach
      the goal that A. had been pursuing unknowingly all his life. This will
      happen in Bk. 8. Right doctrine is a necessary  condition   for  right
      moral conduct and acquisition of salvation. See civg. 19,  23,  quoted
      below on 'a Photini falsitate.) Here it is impossible  to  read  conf.
      dispassionately; to attempt to do so runs the risk of making doctrinal
      quibble of the whole matter, when there is no doubt that A. was trying
      to show, in the language of doctrinal quibbles--that is  to  say,  the
      only language he had--the traces of  a  deep  and  moving  experience"
      (Ibid., II, p. 464).
My hunch
      When reading  O'Donnell, I was pleased by his rejection  of  doctrines
(objective-unsituated-statements-about)  as  the  primary  constitutives  of
Christianity.
      Moreover, I had some sympathy for his alternative: liturgy, cult.  Lex
orandi, lex credendi. Do you want to understand really  Christians?  Do  not
pay exclusive oe even primary attention  to  their  doctrines.  Rather  read
their doctrines against the  context  of  their  liturgy--their  sacramental
life, their liturgical  texts  and  actions.  Doctrines  by  themselves  are
somewhat like a musical script without any notations, that can be played  in
very different ways, although there is only one written text.
      However, I have misgivings  about  O'Donnell's  own  understanding  of
language. Commenting on the Confessions,  he  speaks  of  some  relationship
between words and life--"The words and the life have something  to  do  with
each other. 'Something' is probably the right word", though the life  itself
has no structure (I,  p.  xxx).  However,  he  has  no  clear  idea  of  the
relationship, and  what  he  says  about  doctrines  as  pre-conditions  for
orthopraxis  seems  to  indicate  that  he  is  still  caught  in  a  rather
contemplative view of language. Similarly, perhaps following  Augustine,  he
sees doctrine as  a  pre-condition  to  knowledge  of  God  (see  quotations
above), where "knowledge" seems to  be  conceived  Platonically  by  way  of
pictorial similarity, though admittedly that by itself is not sufficient.
      Anyway, the important point for me--and this  is  my  hunch--is   that
professional  "philosophers'   and   "theologians"   of   the   intellectual
persuasion à la Aquinas,  (for  that  is  the  persuasion  fostered  by  the
Catholic intellectual tradition, with its fixation on  "the  rationality  of
faith" and its horror of "fideism,"  and  much  more  is  that  the  secular
persuasion concerning  philosophy)  are  the  genuine   experts  in  matters
related to faith.*
* To realize this one just has to see the way in which Ex  corde  Ecclesiae,
in reference to departments of theology and of philosophy, still  implicitly
has  a  rationalistic  outlook,  in  spite  of  the  undeniable  (but  still
incomplete) progress made by Vatican II against  Catholic  rationalism  (cf.
Delhougne).
      My hope is to clarify in a Kierkegaardian vein, the  mistake  we  make
and the price we pay for such rationalism.
      It seems to me that the epistemological  mistake  we  have  to  escape
from  is  the  understanding  of  truth  and  knowledge  based  on  written,
objectifying, already objectified language. This entails the privileging  of
the  contemplative   or   speculative   standpoint,   the   attribution   of
foundational primacy to the language of "statements-about"  over  all  other
speech  acts,  and  the  automatic  production  of   demonstrative   (purely
objective) papers for assent--and of papers  combined  into  treatises  like
Summae--over such other genres as narratives.*
* Notice, however, that historians, unlike philosophers, do not  only  write
discussion papers but, at least some of them,  write  actual  history.  Yet,
when it comes to discussing the histories written,  the  absolute  point  of
view of objective statements is taken, and  skepticism  ensues.  As  if  one
could act toward the future without a past particular history whose  details
may be unknown but whose basic structure is taken for granted.
Joe Flay
      This objectifying-objectified language is what Flay is  talking  about
when he speaks of "the tyranny of the categories." When  attention  is  paid
to what is said rather than, and in isolation from, who says  it,  to  whom,
and in what shared situation (as it naturally tends to happen  in  the  case
of written language, in which there is no addresser and no  addresee),  then
what is said is taken for what is objectively the case, "the facts,"  or  at
least for a copy of what is the case, the opinion of the writer as  to  what
is the case. This is speaking or thinking "about."
      Then reality is reduced to what  is  said-known  or  to-be-known.  And
what is said is what  is  discussed  when  there  is  disagreement,  to  the
exclusion of who says it, to whom, and in what circumstances. And the  point
of the discussion is to bring others to assent, for  reality  is  taken  for
object of assent.*
* Doesn't Aquinas say in the first Question of the Summa Th, a. 1,  obj.  2,
that "nothing can be  known,  save  the  true,  which  is  convertible  with
being"? And  doesn't  he  understand  truth  as  an  exclusive  property  of
judgments-statements?]
      Then demonstrative "papers' that appeal exclusively to the  intellect,
that is, to merely  contemplative  understanding,  for  they  refer  to  the
object without  any  reference  to  the  subject,  automatically  emerge  as
partial pictures and "summae" (like Euclidean geometry)  as  total  pictures
or maps, at least of a certain domain.*
* Doesn't Aquinas say in the first Question of the Summa Th, a. 6, reply  to
obj. 2, that whatever contradicts Sacred Scripture is false? And  didn't  he
champion, agains the averroists,  the  fight   against  the  notion  of  two
truths--revealed and philosophical?
      Then, too, the whole of reality becomes a two-dimensional  picture  to
be contemplated and assented to. Since the picture has to be  one,  for  the
truth is one, there is unavoidable conflict and disagreement as  to  whether
the physicists' picture or the biblical picture is the right one.*
* Because the truth is one, Aquinas affirms that  "whatsoever  is  found  in
the other sciences contrary to the truth of this science must  be  condemned
as false" (Summa Th, q. 1, a. 6, reply to obj. 2).
      Then statements become privileged, for they are the only  speech  acts
that "say something," that have a "content" (cf. Searle).*
*  Doesn't  Aquinas  agree  with  Aristotle  that  truth  is  an   exclusive
characteristic  of  judgments-statements?  (See  his  Commentary   on   Peri
Hermeneias in my \wp\chant\excor-3, and cf. Lonergan's Verbum).
And doesn't he make of the  literal  sense,  expressed  in  statements,  the
fundamental Scriptural sense? (See Summa Th, q. 1, aa. 9 and 10).

      And, then, too, statements become foundational of action.*
* Doesn't Aquinas say in the first Question of the  SummaTh,  a.  1,  resp.,
that "the end must be first known by men who are to direct their  intentions
and actions to the end"?
       In fact, however,  the  agent  cannot  enter  a  picture  painted  by
statements for it is two-dimensional (like a film  and  even  worse  than  a
film, for a film can be dramatic, peopled  by  its  participants  qwho  have
their desires and goals), without  existential  depth  (cf.  Merleau-Ponty),
without distances of exposure.*
* Actually, the agent is "in the  midst  of  the  world"  (cf.  Sartre),  as
reflected in narratives, so that  depth  is  not  only  'in  front'  of  the
subject, a characteristic of the objects seen (for the eyes are  in  front),
but also 'in the back,' a characteristic of the  objects  not  seen  but  to
which the subject is no less exposed and much  less  in  control  of.  Hence
Heideggerian "circum-spection" and "care."
      Furthermore, since  the  picture  is  a  picture--two-dimensional  and
without distances of exposure--there is  no  motivation  for  the  agent  to
enter the picture (even if it were possible to enter it),  for  the  objects
are emotionally neutral, objective, factual.  Consequently,  emotions  cease
to  be  intentional  and  become  mere  Humean  feelings  that   arbitrarily
accompany certain pictures rather than others.*
* The issue of  unintentional  feelings  is  another  possible  'hint'.  See
\wp\97\Hints.

Aquinas on two manners of judging
      "Since judgment pertains to wisdom, in accord with  a  twofold  manner
of judging there is a twofold  wisdom.  A  man  may  judge  in  one  way  by
inclination, as whoever has the habit of virtue judges rightly  of  what  is
virtuous by his very inclination towards it. Hence it is the  virtuous  man,
as we read, who is the measure and rule of human acts.  In  another  way,  a
man may judge by knowledge, just as a man learned in moral science might  be
able to judge rightly about virtuous acts, though he  had  not  virtue.  The
first manner of judging divine  things  belongs  to  that  wisdom  which  is
numbered as a gift of the  Holy  Spirit...  The  second  manner  of  judging
belongs to this doctrine, inasmuch as it is acquired by  study,  though  its
principles are obtained by revelation (Summa Th, q. 1, a. 6, reply  to  obj.
2).

