---
title: "97-OCT-2"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1997/97-OCT-2.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


\wp\97\97-oct-2monas\bible-5      August 9, 95 and October 9, 97
           This paper was  originally  "WP\monas\bible-5".  I  renamed  and
           completed it in October 1997.
Two kinds of knowledge in Aristotle's Meta, Lect. 1a,  c.  1,  according  to
Aquinas's commentary or "Expositio"
Lonergan: In Verbum, p.  30,  Lonergan  relates  this  Lectio  1a  of  Aris'
Metaphysics to II Posterior Anlytics, Lectio 20,  where  some  of  the  same
doctrine is presented: "The act of intellect with respect to phantasm is  an
insight: 'cum phantasmata comparentur ad intellectum ut  obiecta  in  quibus
inspicit omne quod inspicit, vel  secundum  perfectam  representationem  vel
secundum negationem' [In Boet. de rin, q. 6, a. 2 ad 5m; cf. C.  Gent.,  II,
73].  Though  theoretical  science  proceeds  from   principles   known   of
themselves, yet these principles are obtained from  sense  as  explained  in
the second book of the Posterior Analytics [in IV Sent., d. 49, q. 2,  a.  7
ad 12m; cf. De An., a. 15 ad 20m]. There the account is of  a  process  from
many sensations  to  a  memory  ,  from  many  memories  to  an  element  of
experience, and from many elements of experience to  grasp  of  a  universal
[In II Post. Anal., lect. 20]. Aquinas noted the parallel in  the  beginning
of the Metaphysics: The man of experience knows that such and such  medicine
cured such and such  patients  in  such  and  such  circumstances;  but  the
technician knows that such a kind of medicine cures such a kind  of  disease
[Ibid. 30]. Like the senses, the man of experience merely  knows  quia,  but
the technician knows causes--propter quid--and so is able to  teach  and  to
solve  objections.  In  other  words,  the  technician  knows  the  abstract
universal, which is an inner word consequent to  insight.  But  the  man  of
experience merely knows the universale in particulari,  and  that  knowledge
is not intellectual knowledge but exists in a  sensitive  potency  variously
named ratio particularis, cogitativa, intellectus passivus.  It  carries  on
comparisons of particulars in virtue of the  influence  of  intellect  [Sum.
Theol., I, q. 78, a. 4 c., ob. 5a & ad  5m].,  and  it  knows  Socrates  and
Callias, not merely as Socrates and Callias, but  also  as  hi  homines  [in
Post Anal, lect. 20; cf. in II de An., lect 13, par. 396  ff],  and  without
this sensitive apprehension of the universal in the particular it  would  be
impossible for the intellect to reach the abstract universal" (pp. 29-30).
      In note 146, ibid., Lonergan adds this useful comment:  "I  would  not
contend that everything to be found in the Aristotelian commentaries is  the
mind of Aquinas. On the other hand, one must insist on some evidence  before
one can consider that an opinion is merely Aristotelian."
      See also Verbum p.7, concerning animal knowledge: "...  animals  know,
not mere phenomena, but things: dogs know their masters, bones, other  dogs,
and  not  merely  the  appearances  of  these  things.  Now  this  sensitive
integration of sensible data also exists in the human  animal  and  even  in
the human philosopher. Take it as knowledge of  reality  and  there  results
the secular contrast between the solid sense of reality  and  the  bloodless
categories of the mind..."].
      Concerning God: "Thus, our knowledge of God's existence  is  just  our
knowledge of the truth of the judgment, Deus est"  (Verbum,  p.  8).  Relate
this to our non-knowledge of God's essence on pp.  152-153,  quoted  at  the
end of this paper.
      "Etiam Deus cognoscitur a nobis per phantasma sui effectus,  inquantum
cognosciumus Deum per negationem ver per causalitatem vel per  excellentiam"
(De Malo, q. 16, a. 8 ad 3m; cf. Summa Theol., I, q. 84, a. 7 ad 3m.  Quoted
in Verbum, p. 29).
      Lonergan on application of what is  already  understood  speculatively
to particular cases  of  problems:  "The  difference  between  invention  or
learning and use of science is that, in the first instance, phantasm has  to
produce the act  of  insight  whereas,  in  subsequent  instances,  informed
intellect guides the production of an appropriate phantasm; in other  words,
in the first instance, we are at the mercy of fortune, the  subconsious,  or
a teacher's skill, for the emergence of the appropriate phantasm; we are  in
a ferment of trying to grasp we know not what; but once we have  understood,
then we can operate on our own, marshalling images  to  a  habitually  known
end.
      On practical understanding or "technical invention" (a rare moment  in
Verbum  where  Lonergan  refers  to  practical  rather   than   speculative-
scientific  knowledge),--the  case  of  the  inventor,  the  architect,  the
craftsman--see p. 5: "In invention  creative imsagination is needed; in  the
practical arts,  imagination  moves  in  the  worn  grooves  of  custom  and
routine; but in both cases there is the same general  form  of  intellectual
process, for in both  certain  general  principles  are  known,  in  both  a
determinate end is envisaged, in both the  principles  are  applied  to  the
attainment of the end, and in both this  application  leads  to  a  plan  of
operations that, as such, is, not knowing what is,  but  only  the  idea  of
what one may do... It is not merely the  prescription  of  the  doctor,  the
plan of the  architect,  the  idea  of  the  inventor  that,  in  the  first
instance, is the product and object of thought. The  same  holds  for  every
definition and every judgment."

Susan Langer: "Man, unlike all other  animals,  uses  'signs'  not  only  to
indicate things, but to represent them. To a  clever  dog,  the  name  of  a
person is a signal that the person is present; you say the name,  he  pricks
up his ears and looks for its  object.  If  you  say  'dinner,'  he  becomes
restive, expecting food. You cannot make any communication to  him  that  is
not taken as a signal of something immediately forthcoming. His  mind  is  a
simple and direct transmitter of  messages  from  the  world  to  his  motor
centers. With a man it is different. We use certain 'signs' among  ourselves
that do not point to anything in our actual surroundings. Most of our  words
are not signs in the sense of signals. They are used to talk  about  things,
not to  direct  our  eyes  and  ears  and  noses  toward  them.  Instead  of
announcers of things, they are reminders. They have been called  'substitute
signs,' for in our present experience they take the place of things that  we
have perceived in the past, or even things that we  can  merely  imagine  by
combinining memories, things that might be in past or future experience.  Of
course such 'signs' do not usually serve as  vicarious  stimuli  to  actions
that would be appropriate to their meanings; where  the  objects  are  quite
normally not present, that would result in a  complete  chaos  of  behavior.
They serve, rather, to let  us  develop  a  characteristic  attitude  toward
objects in absentia, which is called 'thinking of' or  'referring  to'  what
is not here. 'Signs' used in this capacity are not symptoms of  things,  but
symbols (Susanne K. Langer, Philosophy in a New Key, New  American  Library,
N. Y. Nine Printing, 1958, p. 37).
      "This passage [from Helen Keller's biography] is  the  best  affidavit
we could hope to find for the genuine difference between  sign  and  symbol.
The sign is something to act upon, or a means to command action; the  symbol
is an instrument of thought. Note  how  Miss  Keller  qualifies  the  mental
process just preceding her discovery of words--'This thought, if a  wordless
sensation may be called a thought.' Real thinking is possible  only  in  the
light of genuine language, no matter how  limited,  how  primitive;  in  her
case, it became  possible  with  the  discovery  that  'w-a-t-e-r'  was  not
necessarily a sign that water was wanted or expected, but was  the  name  of
this substance, by which it could be  mentioned,  conceived,  remembered.  -
Since  a  name,  the  simplest  symbol,  is  directly  associated   with   a
conception, and is employed by a subject to realize the conception,  one  is
easily led to treat a name as a 'conceptual sign,' an artificial sign  which
announces the presence  of  a  certain  idea.  In  a  sense  this  is  quite
justified; yet it strikes a strained and unnatural note, which is usually  a
fair warning that the attempted interpretation  misses  the  most  important
feature in its material. In the present case,  it  misses  the  relation  of
conceptions to the concrete world, which is so close and so  important  that
it enters into the very structure of 'names.' A  name,  above  all,  denotes
something. 'James' may represent  a  conception,  but  it  names  a  certain
person. In the case of proper nouns this relation of the symbol to  what  it
denotes is so striking that denotation has been  confused  with  the  direct
relation of sign and object, signification. As a  matter  of  fact,  'James'
does not, without further ado, signify  a  person;  it  denotes  him--it  is
associated with a conception which 'fits'  the  actual  person...  -  In  an
ordinary sign-function, there are three  esssential  terms:  subject,  sign,
and object. In denotation, which is the commonest kind  of  symbol-function,
there have  to  be  four:  subject,  symbol,  conception,  and  object...  -
Denotation is, then, the complex relationship which a name has to an  object
which bears it; but what shall the more direct  relation  of  the  name,  or
symbol, to its associated concept be called?  It  shall  be  called  by  its
traditional name, connotation. The connotation of a word is  the  conception
it conveys. Because the  connotation  remains  with  the  syumbol  when  the
object of its denotation is neither present nor looked for, we are  able  to
think about the object without reacting to it overtly at all" (Ibid.,pp. 63-
64).

Joseph Flay: "Our attention is directed to the things  said  and  away  from
the saying of them. We are soon submerged in an analysis  of  the  relations
between the categories, descriptions of them, or lists  of  them.  And  this
discussion  of  the  kinds  of  things  that  can  be  said  eventually  and
inevitably leads us to  a  metaphysics  of  the  kinds.  The  human  act  of
predication and the  domain  of  action  belonging  to  it  disappears  from
philosophical view... The point of direct relevance here is  that  there  is
implicit in Aristotle,  and  I  think  fundamental  to  his  discussion  but
ignored by him,  a  concern  for  the  act  of  predication  itself,  for  a
specification of the relation between a verbal judgment and the judgment  as
an act in which a speaker is related to the world in some  specific  manner"
(Joseph C. Faly, "Categories of Comportment," in Categories:  A  Colloquium,
Department of Philosophy, The Pennsylvania State University, 178,  p.  124).
[Here I add, parentethically, that predication, particularly theoretical  or
speculative predication, is not, by far, the only or even the principal  way
in which the speaker is related to the world].
            "... I will argue that a fundamental and original  concern  with
categories, a concern  which  also  addressed  the  domain  of  action,  was
forgotten for the sake of a purely theoretical  knowledge  which  abstracted
from the  domain  of  action,  thus  becoming  useless  as  wisdom,  however
profound as knowledge.
             "The  original  order  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  thast  the
discussion in Categories ... concerns the fact that we make judgments,  that
is, that something is said  of  a  thing  (legetai)  or  that  something  is
predicated of a thing (kategoretai). In this act  of  judgment,  furthermore
it is clear that we are not speaking simply of propositions  or  statements,
but rather of a way in which someone who is judging is in  relation  to  the
thing judged or spoken about. But  it quickly...  turns  us  away  from  the
theme of predication as an act to the predicates themselves--what they  are,
how many they are, how they are related to each other" (Ibid. p. 123).
            "The characteristic, and  the  consequent  problem,  which  Kant
shares with all of his predecessors (save  a  small  handful),  is  that  of
separating theoretical and practical reason, a separation  which  is  simply
Kant's version of the Aristotelian separation of episteme  and  sophia  from
phronesis (Ibid., p. 126. And see what follows through p. 131).
                                        .

                                  .          .
      (1) Knowledge for its own  sake  (propter  ipsum  cognoscere,  propter
ipsum  scire--cuiusmodi  sunt  scientiae  mathematicae):   Scientiae   autem
dignitatem ostendit per hoc quod naturaliter desideratur ab omnibus  tamquam
finis, and (2) Knowledge for its  usefulness  for  something  else  (propter
necessitatem  actionis  ad  utilitatem   vitae,   propter   voluptatem,   ad
introductionem  in  aliis  scientiis  sicut   scientiae   logicales):   Illi
artifices  sunt  sapientiores  quorum  scientiae  non  sunt  ad   utilitatem
inventae, sed propter ipsum scire, cuiusmodi sunt scientiae speculativae.
       -  In  animalibus  cognitio  sensitiva   est   provisiva   ad   vitae
necessitatem et ad propriam  operationem.  In   hoc  vero  quod  cognitionem
animalium determinat per comparationem  ad  regimen  vitae  datur  intelligi
quod cognitio inest ipsis  animalibus  non  propter  ipsum  cognoscere,  sed
propter necessitatem actionis.
      - In  hominibus  cognitio  sensitiva:  cum  sensus  ad  duo  in  nobis
deserviant, sc. ad cognitionem rerum, et ad utilitatem vitae;  diliguntur  a
nobis propter seipsos, in quantum cognoscitivi sunt, et etiam  propter  hoc,
quod utilitatem ad vitam conferunt. Et hoc patet ex hoc,  quod  ille  sensus
maxime ab hominibus diligitur, qui magis cognoscitivus est, qui  est  sensus
visus, quem diligimus non solum ad  agendum  aliquid,  sed  etiam  si  nihil
agere debemus.
      - In hominibus cognitio intellectiva mixta: "experimentum" or
"scientia experimentalis," or "experientia," and "ars."
      - In hominibus cognitio intellectiva pura: Substantiis autem
separatis, quae sunt principia intellectus humani, et ad quae intellectus
humanus se habet ut imperfectum ad perfectum, non coniungitur homo nisi per
intellectum: unde et in hoc ultima hominis felicitas consistit. Et ideo
homo naturaliter desiderat scientiam. Nec obstat si aliqui homines
scientiae huic studium non impendant... Hoc autem proponit Aristoteles ut
ostendat, quod quaerere scientiam non propter aliud utilem, qualis haec
scientia, non est vanum, cum naturale desiderium vanum esse non possit.

      Sensus: Communicant autem omnia animalia in hoc quod naturaliter
sensus habent. Nam ex hoc animal est animal, quod habet animam sensitivam.
Non tamen omnia habent omnes sensus, sed solum perfecta. Omnia vero habent
sensum tactus. Ipse enim est quodammodo fundamentum aliorum sensuum. Non
autem habent omnia sensum visus, quia sensus visus est omnibus aliis
perfectior in congnoscendo, sed tactus magis est necessarius. Est enim
congnoscitivus eorum ex quibus animal constat, sc. calidi, figidi, humidi
et sicci.

      Tres gradus cognitionis (sensitivae) quae est in brutis
(a) Animalia imperfecta, quae sunt immobilia secundum locum ut conchilia.
Purely tactual (omnia habent sensum tactus). Without movement to provide
for their lives. Without memory (quae ex sensu fit. Memoria sequitur
phantasiam) and without imagination (phantasia, quae est motus factus a
sensu secundum actum. In quibusdam animalibus ex sensu non fit phantasia
[affective imagination?], et sic in eis non potest esse memoria).  Also
without prudence (ex praeteritorum memoria de futuris providentia,
aestimatio de convenientibus prosequendis et fugiendis nocivis.  Dicitur
autem prudentia aliter in brutis animalibus et aliter in hominibus esse. In
hominibus quidem est prudentia secundum quod ex ratione deliberant quid eos
oporteat agere; unde dicitur sexto Ethicorum quod prudentia est recta ratio
agibilium. Iudicium autem de rebus agendis non ex rationis deliberatione,
sed ex quodam naturae instinctu, prudentia in aliis animalibus dicitur.
Unde prudentia in aliis animalibus est naturalis aestimatio de
convenientibus prosequendis et fugiendis nocivis, sicut agnus sequitur
matrem et fugit lupum).
(b) Animalia perfecta
      # - With locomotio (intentional, ad "finem intentum"), with phantasia
[affective, prospective imagination: motus factus a sensu secundum actum),
with memoria, with prudentia (Cum enim in amimalibus cognitio sensiitiva
sit provisiva ad vitae necessitatem et ad propriam operationem, animalia
illa memoriam habere debent, quae moventur ad distans motu progressivo;
nisi enim apud ea remaneret per memoriam intentio praeconcepta, ex qua ad
motum inducuntur, motum continuare non possunt quousque finem intentum
consequerentur).
      # With motus et parum experimenti: Supra memoriam autem in hominibus
proximum est experimentum, quod quaedam animalia non participant nisi
parum. This is acquired knowledge which becomes "consuetudo" (acquired
habitus?)--[regular expectations about behavior of objects by which these
animals are affected attractively or aversively, which are learned rather
than inherited, and accordingly regular dispositions to respond (?)]: Sic
se habet consuetudo ad memoriam in animalibus ut experimentum ad rationem
particularem.
      Cognitio sensitiva-intellectiva in hominibus
      In people there is knowledge with "locomotio," with "phantasia," with
"memoria," with "prudentia-animalis," with "experimentum" proprie dictum
which is the same as "scientia" and "scientia experimentalis," with "ars,"
and with "prudentia-rationalis."
      # - Experimentum: Supra memoriam autem in hominibus proximum est
experimentum, quod quaedam animalia non participant nisi parum.
Experimentum est ex collatione plurium singularium in memoria receptorum.
Huiusmodi autem collatio est homini propria [because of objectification,
abstraction, verbalization?], et pertinet ad vim cogitativam, quae ratio
particularis dicitur: quae est collativa intentionum individualium, sicut
ratio universalis rationum universalium. - Sicut se habet experimentum ad
rationem particularem, et consuetudo ad memoriam in animalibus, ita se
habet ars ad rationem universalem. - Ex memoria in hominibus experimentum
causatur: quia ex multis memoriis unius rei accipit homo experimentum de
aliquo, quo experimento potens est ad facile et recte operandum. [Notice
the connection of experimentum with successful action].
      # - Scientia et ars: Ex experientia in hominibus fit scientia
(experimentalis) et ars. Experientia facit artem, sed inexperientia casum.
[Notice the ambiguity: "ars" is the acquired  ability to act so as to
produce the desired results systematically rather than by chance, and it is
also theoretical knowledge of the cause, knowledge of the universal,
knowledge propter quid]. Quod enim aliquis inexpertus recte operatur, a
casu est. Modus autem, quo ars fit ex experimento, est idem cum modo
praedicto, quo experimentum fit ex memoria. Nam sicut ex multis memoriis
fit una experimentalis scientia, ita ex multis experimentis apprehensis fit
universalis acceptio de omnibus similibus. Unde plus hoc habet ars quam
experimentum: quia experimentum tantum circa singularia versatur, ars autem
circa universalia.
            Exempla experimenti et artis: Cum homo accipit in sua
cognitione quod haec medicina contulit Socrati et Platoni tali infirmitate
laborantibus, et multis aliis singularibus, quidquid sit illud, hoc ad
experientiam pertinet; sed cum aliquis accipit, quod hoc omnibus conferat
in tali specie aegritudinis determinata, et secundum talem complexionem,
sicut quod contulit febricitantibus et phlegmaticis et cholericis, id iam
ad artem pertinet. [Notice that both experiment and ars are connected with
verbalization-ojectification in the case of people, whereas there is no
objectification in animals. This might be related to the Aristotelian
distinction between speculative and practical knowledge, speculative being
reflective and in conditions in which response is not immediatkely
required].
            Contrast between experimentum and ars:
            # - Quantum ad actum pertinet, experientia nihil videtur
differre ab arte. Cum enim ad actionem venitur, tollitur differentia quae
inter experimentum et artem erat per universale et singulare: quia sicut
experimentum circa singularia operatur, ita et ars; unde praedicta
diferentia erat in cognoscendo tantum.       # -Differunt tamen in
efficacia operandi et in hoc experimentum est superior. Nam experti magis
proficiunt in operando illis qui habent rationem universalem artis sine
experimento. Cuius causa est quia actiones sunt circa singularia. Unde
medicus not sanat hominem nisi per accidens, sed per se sanat Platonem aut
Socratem. Unde, si aliquis habet rationem artis sine experientia, erit
quidem perfectus in hoc quod universale cognoscat: sed quia ignorat
singulare cum experimento careat, multoties in curando peccabit.
            # - Differunt quantumum ad cognitionem et in hoc ars est
superior. Ars est universalium, "experientia"  singularium (see 21). Habens
artem potest disputando obviare his quae contra artem dicuntur, non autem
habens experimentum. [Notice the connection between experimentum proprie
dictum, not animal experimentum, and the capacity to communicate it
verbally to others and to teach the universal to others by way of
demonstration]. Probat praedictam praeminentiam artis tripliciter: (a) Illi
qui sciunt causam et propter quid, scientiores sunt et sapientiores illis
qui ignorant causam, sed solum sciunt quia. Experti autem sciunt quia, sed
nesciunt propter quid. Artifices vero sciunt causam, et propter quid
(architectores sciunt causas factorum... architector dicitur quasi
principalis artifex). (b) Signum scientiae est quod possit docere, quod est
scientiam in alio causare. Artifices autem docere possunt, quia cum causas
cognoscant, ex eis possunt demonstrare. Demonstratio est syllogismus
faciens scire, ut dicitur primo Posteriorum. Experti autem non possunt
docere, non possunt ad scientiam perducere, cum causam ignorent. Et si ea
quae experimento cognoscunt aliis tradant, non recipient per modum
scientiae, sed per modum opinionis vel credulitatis. Unde patet quod
artifices sint magis sapientes et scientes expertis. (c) Ponit tertiam
rationem: Cognitiones singularium magis sunt propriae sensibus quam alicui
alteri cognitioni, cum omnis cognitio singularium a sensu oriatur. Sed
talem nullo sensu dicimus sapientiam, scilicet propter hoc quod aliquis
sensus cognoscat quia, tamen non propter quid cognoscit. Tactus enim
iudicat quod ignis calidus est, non tamen apprehendit propter quid: unde
experti qui habent cognitionem singularium causam ignorantes, spaientes
dici non possunt. [Notice the ambiguity of tactus iudicat. In animals it is
a matter of being confronted with object for response and, through past
experience, of expectation which will guide future action. In people, by
contrast, in addition to this, intellectus iudicat: possibility of verbal
communication to others (knowledge quia proprie dictum, which can go two
ways: either practically, to orient present and future action, or
theoretically, to find out the propter quid].  Ergo scientiae
[disciplines?] aliquae magis sunt admirabiles et magis dignae nomine
sapientiae propter eminentiorem sensum, et non propter utilitatem.
                       Two kinds of sciences
      Cum ergo plures artes sint repertae quantum ad utilitatem, quarum
quaedam ad vitae necessitatem, sicut mechanicae; quaedam vero ad
introductionem in aliis scientiis, sicut scientiae logicales; illi
artifices dicendi sunt sapientiores, quorum scientiae non sunt ad
utilitatem inventae, sed propter ipsum scire, cuiusmodi sunt scientiae
speculativae.
      Et quod [speculativae scientiae] non sunt propter huiusmodi [vel ad
necessitatem vitae, vel ad voluptatem, sed propter seipsas repertae] patet
ex loco quo inventae sunt. Et primum his locis ubi vacabant, id est, ab
aliis occupationibus quiescentes studio vacabant quasi necessariis
abundantes. Unde et circa Aegyptum primo inventae sunt artes mathematicae,
quae sunt maxime speculativae, a sacerdotibus, qui sunt concessi studio
vacare, et de publico expensas habebant.
                             .................
                                  My Comments
- In animals knowledge is necessarily desirous, connected with present or
future action (through instinct or through experience and developed
expectation, but without verbalization), for the sake of satisfying natural
desires, of achieving passively received goals (hence no deliberation
needed or possible). And their action is either inherited (merely reflex,
or instinctual like bees build hives), or learned by gradually developing
the skilled conduct to cope, that is, to achieve the passively received
goals.
- In people there are two possibilities. Either one is actually geared
toward action, or one is not because the immediate practical interests are
neutralized, as when Descartes meditates by the chimney. And then, again,
there is a double possibility: either thinking for the sake of acting, or
thinking philosophically, reflectively, for the sake of understanding.
      An intermediate stage seems to be that in which one has time to
deliberate and decide what one will do, or to find out and/or produce the
means of doing what one dreams of doing.
      Aris suggests that speculative knowledge is the result of thinking
not informed by desire (in the sense of interest) but by sheer curiosity or
natural desire to know; thus it is knowledge pursued for its own sake, as a
goal, not as a means toward something else. And metaphysics or first
philosophy is the prime example of such a discipline and of such knowledge.
It is knowledge of being, of the propter quid of whatever is, with no other
usefulness than being known.
Practical syllogism
      Nussbaum, De Motu Animalium, p. 179: I know that my friend desires
money above everything and that he believes-knows he will lose all his
money if he does not travel by boat to Aegina today. Yet I go and look for
him in Piraeus. "Have I really understood what this wanting and this
believing are? Aris will say I have not."
      In this hypothesis, I know that my friend is not  in  Piraeus  but  on
his way to Aegina, for desiring the end is desiring--in the sense  of  using
them as  if  one  desired  them--the  means.  Desire  of  end  +  belief  of
efficiency of means + availability of means necessarily  results  in  acting
by using the means. It is "practical necessity" (p. 180). "We cannot  reduce
the practical syllogisms to other  patterns  of  valid  inference....  While
insisting  that  the  necessity  of  his  teleological  patterns  is  to  be
distinguished  from  theoretical  necesssity,  he  (Aris)  claims  that  the
practical examples are logically  conclusive  in  their  own  way"  (Ibid.).
Hence the practical syllogism to show the parallelism.
      The friend's case is interesting. If I (the friend) know-believe  that
my friend is in Aegina but I look for him in Piraeus, then I do  not  really
know-believe that he is in Aegina. Why?  Because  belief-knowledge  here  is
practical, disposition to act, informative of action, applicative under  the
appropriate cirumstances of availability of means and even inventive of  the
means when they are not ready to hand.
      But is there a syllogism? Not on the agent's  part.  As  an  agent,  I
desire as a goal but do not know that I desire. (Desiring is  not  the  same
as knowing in the sense of judging-assenting).  Only  the  contemplator,  by
hypothesis, knows that I desire something as a goal, and  that  I  know  the
means, and that they are available. For a contemplator  who  would  consider
these propositions, knowledge of my action  would  follow  as  a  conclusion
necessarily to be assented to, given his or her human  experience.  But  for
me the agent it is not a conclusion (that is, not a judgment or a  statement
to which I assent as the contemplator does on the basis of his or her  human
experience). For me the agent, knowing that  my  friend  is  in  Piraeus  is
knowing practically, that is, being disposed, under conditions of  exposure,
to go to Piraeus to see him.
      An important remark. Desiring by itself does not make  something  into
a goal; it  is  a  mere  inclination,  which  even  in  the  animal  may  be
superseded by a stronger  inclination.  A  goal  is  a  goal  only  in  actu
exercitu, in being actually chosen and pursued as a goal, for its own  sake,
while other things are subordinated to it by being used as means. A goal  is
a goal and the means  is  a  means  (for  the  goal's  sake)  only  in  actu
exercitu. The necessity is practical because it is of the  order  of  action
and its outcome is what we usually call action in a more  restricted  sense,
that is, the observable behavior. [The order of action  involves  our  human
experience as agents. Only an experienced  agent  can  grasp  the  necessary
connection that leads me to look for my friend in  Piraeus  rather  than  in
Aegina. This is what leads Aristotle to believe that practical necessity  is
of a special kind. Indeed, it is not "logical" in that it is  not  a  matter
of pure universal abstract concepts]. There is a  necessary  connection--not
logical by its form but experiential on  the  subject-agent's  side--between
desire of something above all (that is  as  a  goal),  availability  of  the
means, and  action  of  using  the  means  to  achieve  the  goal.  Desiring
something as a goal is using the means to achieve it if and when  the  means
are available. Understanding desiring as a  goal  amounts  to  understanding
this. And since in the involved agent this understanding is practical,  that
is, applicative, understanding my friend's desire  is  looking  for  him  in
Aegina rather than in Piraeus.
On human and animal knowledge and on  speculative  and  practical  knowledge

      Now, to return to  the  first  section  of  the  Mataphysics,  how  do
animals know, and how does people's knowledge differ from animal  knowledge?
In other words,  do  people  have  two  ways  of  knowing,  speculative  and
practical, as both Aris and Aquinas  maintain,  whereas  animals  only  know
practically?  And  what  exactly  is   knowing   practically   and   knowing
speculatively? How does this distinction originate?
      In the Metaphysics, 1a lectio, Aris  has  much  to  say  about  animal
knowledge. Now, on what basis does he determine that animals  know?  On  the
basis  of  their  successful  adaptive  (that   is,   teleological)   action
reconstructed according to his own human experience of acting.
      As Aris sees it, animal knowledge is not for its own sake but for  the
sake of something else: cognitio inest ipsis animalibus  non  propter  ipsum
cognoscere sed propter necessitatem actionis. The action of  the  animal  is
related to the environment in a selective way that favors the  survival  and
well-being of the  individual  and  of  the  species.  The  more  active  or
inventive (by contrast to passive and uniform), the more  complex,  and  the
more varied the teleological action, the higher the  knowledge  is  declared
to be.
[The suggestion is that  something  within  the  animal  called  'knowledge'
shapes the action. In the case of  the  lowest  species  without  locomotion
knowledge is constituted by  mere  tactile  sensations  to  which  a  reflex
movement corresponds.] Thus the animals who have no  locomotion  to  provide
for their lives (ad finem intentum)  possess  only  the  tactile  sense  (no
imagination, quae est motus factus a sensu secundum actum; no  memory,  quae
ex  sensu  fit;  no  prudentia,  ex   praeteritorum   memoria   de   futuris
providentia,  aestimatio  de  convenientibus   prosequendis   et   fugiendis
nocivis). All these, by contrast,  are  found  in  the  highest  species  of
animals. What no animal  has,  however,  is  human  prudence.  In  hominibus
quidem est prudentia  (recta  ratio  agibilium)  secundum  quod  ex  ratione
deliberant quid eos oporteat agere. What animals have is an  instinct,  very
likely refined and sharpened  by  experience  in  the  case  of  the  higher
species, that leads them to act  in  the  way  most  appropriate  for  their
survival and the survival of their species: Iudicium autem de rebus  agendis
non ex rationis deliberatione, sed ex quodam  naturae  instinctu:  naturalis
estimatio de convenientibus prosequendis et fugiendis nocivis,  sicut  agnus
sequitur matrem et fugit lupum.
      How  does  Aris  determine  that  animals  do  not  have  deliberative
prudence? Because of the uniformity of their behavior. As  Marx  would  say,
animals do not invent, they do not adapt their conduct to the production  of
something they really invented. Insofar as they  transform  the  environment
in a teleological  way  to  serve  their  needs,  they  only  transform  the
environment according to the standards, that is, to the  instinct  of  their
species. Hence each generation of animals lives fundamentally  in  the  same
way as the previous generation. That is not the case with people,  for  they
invent their own preferred state of the world and  adapt  their  conduct  to
its realization. Their goals as to the world in which  they  will  live  are
not just pre-given and passively  received.  Furthermore,  as  Sartre  would
point out, they also choose their goals, through  deliberation,  as  to  the
kind of persons they will become. Natural or acquired  cultural  inclination
does not determine their conduct, rather they themselves determine  it,  for
their conduct may be at odds with natural  and  with  acquired  (natural  or
cultural) inclination.
      Now, Aristotle doesn't quite articulate his point  on  the  difference
between people and even the highest species of animals in quite the  way  of
Marx and Sartre. He certainly introduces intelligence as the  discriminating
factor, but it seems that intelligence for him is more a  matter  of  seeing
than of acting and that his analysis is based on linguistic  considerations,
on what people say or write when they are not  involved  in  action,  rather
than on action itself. [It is symptomatic that the word desire, which  plays
an axial function in Aris' treatise De Motu  Animalium,  doesn't  appear  at
all, I think, in the 1a Lectio of the Metaphysics. That  it  doesn't  appear
in  connection  with  knowledge  for   its   own   sake   (speculative)   is
understandable, since this knowledge is by definition limited to the  desire
to know. But the  word  doesn't  appear  either  in  connection  with  human
practical knowledge and even with animal knowledge which is acknowledged  to
be for the sake--that is, motivated by the  desire--of  survival  and  well-
being.]
      As I said above, knowledge here  seems  to  be  something  within  the
person or the animal, something seen or  experienced.  The  knowing  process
may  aim  at  and  terminate  in  knowledge  (speculative   knowledge),   or
constitute a sort of law or rule for action to obtain the good aimed at  and
for which knowledge  is  a  means  (practical  knowledge).  In  both  cases,
however, knowledge as  knowledge,  is  complete  in  itself  and  the  same,
independently of whether it is pursued for its own sake or not  and  whehter
it is applied or not. Thus, both people and animals have senses and  sensory
knowledge, though not all the same senses and, consequently,  not  the  same
extension and complexity of sensory knowledge. The superior  animal  species
share with people a quasi knowledge quia,

      experimentum,  quod  quaedam  animalia  non  participant  nisi  parum.
      Experimentum  est  ex  collatione  plurium  singularium   in   memoria
      receptorum. Huiusmodi autem collatio est homini propria,  et  pertinet
      ad  vim  cogitativam,  quae  ratio  particularis  dicitur:  quae   est
      collativa intentionum individualium, sicut ratio universalis  rationum
      universalium.- Sicut se habet experimentum ad  rationem  particularem,
      et consuetudo ad memoriam in animalibus, ita se habet ars ad  rationem
      universalem.- Ex memoria in hominibus experimentum causatur:  quia  ex
      multis memoriis unius rei accipit homo  experimentum  de  aliquo,  quo
      experimento potens est ad facile et recte operandum.
      But only people have ars and genuine scientia, for they  do  not  only
possess vis cogitativa that grasps the  universal  in  the  particular  (the
quia) but also ars, a deed  of  the  intellect  that  grasps  the  universal
itself (the propter quid), and that constitutes scientia that can be  taught
through demonstration (syllogismus faciens scire). By contrast the quia  can
only be communicated through authority and received through credulity.
      It is here that the  difference  between  animals  and  people  shows.
Aristotle senses that animals do not quite share "experimentum" with  people
(nisi parum participant) because experimentum is an equivocal term.  On  the
one hand, it means the
intellectual grasp of the universal in the particular, which is  beyond  the
ken of animals. This is the knowledge quia  that  can  be  taught  to  other
people authoritatively and be received by them through  credulity.  This  is
the work of the vis cogitativa (cf. Lonergan  above).  This  knowledge  quia
is, in its turn, the  basis  for  knowledge  propter  quid,  when  ars  that
involves the intellect grasps the universal by  itself.  However,  knowledge
quia also contributes ad facile et recte operandum, when it takes  the  form
of a practical recipe. What is within the ken  of  animals  and  they  share
with people is experimentum in the sense  of  purely  practical  applicative
knowledge, that is, general  disposition  (consuetudo)  to  respond  in  the
appropriate way to a kind  of  objects  on  the  basis  of  successful  past
experience. The general disposition is  activated  by  the  presence  of  an
object representative of the kind, under the  right  conditions  of  desire.
This knowledge is related to the biological natural goals  of  animals.  The
memories  from  which  the  universal  in  the  particular  is  grasped  are
automatically  selected  according  to  the  species  to  which  the  animal
belongs, and they are gathered from  instances  of  past  successful  action
prompted by natural desires. Animals, however, do not really have  knowledge
quia (this is why they "participant experimentum nisi parum")  because  they
cannot objectify the quia through verbalization; in other  words,  the  quia
in them only functions applicatively, as it tends to function  in  children.

      How is this related to my  claim  that  Aris'  analysis  is  based  on
language, particularly the language of predicative statements?
Susanne Langer's quotations at the  beginning  of  this  paper  might  prove
enlightening in this respect. She is talking about one  linguistic  practice
in particular, namely, talking "in absentia," that is, when  the  object  is
not present or at least  doesn't  demand  response.  Now,  in  the  case  of
animals an object demands response only when it  is  actually  present,  and
this is the only relationship animals can entertain  to  objects.  In  other
words, they only sense them applicatively in relation to  their  own  actual
needs, as objects for actual response. Langer is certainly right  in  saying
that, unlike animals and thanks to our linguistic ability, we can deal  with
objects symbolically in absentia. What she doesn't seem to realize is  that,
even in absentia, we can consider them in  two  different  ways:  either  in
themselves, in terms of "what is this" or "why this," wondering  about  them
as objects of mere intellectual  curiosity,  objectively,  predicatively--be
it descriptively or explanatorily--or we can consider them  in  relation  to
us (to our needs and desires), subjectively, as objects for response  or  as
instruments for the realization of our goals. In the latter case,  they  are
objects  of  consideration,  too,  but  as  attractive  or   repellent,   as
profitable or dangerous, whereas in the former case they are  value-neutral,
without positive or negative  appeal  to  us,  'scientific  objects.'  Their
actual existence or lack thereof are irrelevant, all that  counts  is  their
intelligibility. Now, Langer  doesn't  take  this  second  possibility  into
consideration. She focuses  exclusively  on  talking  about.  Her  model  is
Hellen Keller, who in the case of w-a-t-e-r moves from "sign" for action  to
"symbol" as instrument of thought to satisfy  the  disinterested  desire  to
know. Actually, Langer goes as far  as  to  hold  that  the  human  need  to
conceptualize has the primacy, in language, over the need to communicate:
      The  primary  function  of  language   is   generally   said   to   be
      communication... It is best to admit  that  language  is  primarily  a
      vocal actualization of the tendency to see reality sumbolically,  that
      it is precisely this  quality which renders it  a  fit  instrument  of
      communication... - If it is true that 'the  tendency  to  see  reality
      symbolically' is the real keynote of language,  then  most  researches
      into the roots of the speech function have been misdirected (Ibid.  p.
      99).


      As for Aristotle, his case is more  complicated.  While  he  considers
speculative  knowledge  (intellectual  grasp  of  the   universal   in   the
particular, and of the explanatory universal), he definitely doesn't  ignore
practical knowledge. Indeed, he speaks of prudentia,  which  is  de  futuris
providentia,  aestimatio  de  convenientibus   prosequendis   et   fugiendis
nocivis. This is clearly related to action, though it differs in people  and
in animals. Prudentia in hominibus is  ex  rationis  deliberatione,  whereas
prudentia in animals is not deliberative but ex  quodam  naturae  instinctu.
In people prudentia involves practical  intellect  (deliberative  choice  of
end and real discovery or even invention of means), which is beyond the  ken
of animals. (Prudentia in people concerns both the discovery  and  even  the
invention of the means to be  employed  in  the  pursuance  of  the  end--an
aspect of what I call "functional thinking"--as  well  as  the  deliberative
choice of  the  end  to  be  pursued.  For  instance,  the  British  captain
deliberated and chose to abandon the ship in order to save his men,  a  goal
which was incompatible with the protection of his ship and  which  he  chose
deliberatively over the  protection  of  his  ship.  Animals  wouldn't  have
deliberated; they woud have abandoned the ship ex  instinctu).  Deliberative
prudence, though guided by desire or aversion (as in this case  and  in  the
case of the Florida entomologist), is genuinely intelligent, for  the  means
to achieve the end and the adaptation of the conduct to the  achievement  of
the end is invented, not dictated by instinct or imitation.  Because  it  is
intelligent  rather  than  blind  or  purely  automatic  it   requires   the
linguistic ability to conceptualize  both  the  possible  desirables  before
choosing the goal as well as the coprresponding possible means. Aris  refers
implicitly   to    conceptualization,    though    only    to    speculative
conceptualization, in his example of experimentum:
      cum homo accipit quod haec medicina contulit Socrati et  Platoni  tali
      infirmitate laborantibus, et multis aliis singularibus,  quidquid  sit
      illud, hoc ad experientiam pertinet; sed cum aliquis accipit, quod hoc
      omnibus conferat in tali specie aegritudinis determinata, et  secundum
      talem   complexionem,   sicut   quod   contulit   febricitantibus   et
      phlegmaticis, id iam ad artem pertinet.
      Now, it  is  precisely  on  experimentum  that  Aristotle  places  the
bifurcation between animals and people. Animals non nisi parum  participant,
because they have no genuine  grasp  of  the  universal  (not  even  in  the
particular, as it happens in the case  of  people  in  experientia,  because
people are linguistic), in that they get it only  applicatively,  under  the
form of  automatic  practical  expectation  (similia  similiter  respondenda
sunt). By  contrast,  by  verbalizing  what  is  the  case,  by  formulating
verbally  quod  haec  medicina  contulit  Socrati  et  multis   aliis   tali
infirmitate laborantibus, people grasp per se or as such  the  universal  in
the particulars, in that they can attend to it conceptually in  the  absence
of the object to be responded to. (What is verbalized they  can  communicate
and teach. In the case of practical judgement, what they verbalize they  can
communicate, too; so they can deliberate with others or  seek  their  advise
before deciding). The verbalization gives them the pause  and  the  distance
that the immediately applicative grasp animals have doesn't give them.*
(* Perception confronts animals and people with objects for  response,  with
that  which  is  presently  to  be  responded  to.  What  is  linguistically
formulated, by contrast, is not itself what is to be  responded  to,  but  a
"conception" of what is to be responded to (cf. Hellen  Keller's  case).  At
most it refers to what is to be responded  to  ("denotation").  However,  it
also may refer to something that is not to be responded to but to an  object
for theoretical consideration--the propter quid to  be  understood--or  even
for "practical consideration," so to say: Who do people say Jesus  is?  This
is what genuine theology does. It is a distillation of  personal  experience
of interpersonal interaction with Jesus
      To refer to Susan Langer again, all names connote (that is,  refer  to
a conception) and denote (that is, refer  to  an  object),  but  only  under
certain  circumstances  or  within  certain  linguistic  contexts  do   they
"signal" or announce the presence of the object named.
      "If you say "James' to a dog whose master bears  that  name,  the  dog
      will interpret the sound as a sign, and look for James. Say  it  to  a
      person who knows someone called thus, and he  will  ask:  'What  about
      James?' That simple question is forever beyond the dog;  signification
      is the only meaning a name can have  for  him--a   meaning  which  the
      master's name shares with the master's smell, with his  footfall,  and
      his characteristic ring of the doorbell. In a  human  being,  however,
      the name evokes the  conception  of  a  certain  man  so  called,  and
      prepares the mind for further conceptions in which the notion of  that
      man figures, therefore the human being  naturally  asks:  'What  about
      James?'" (ibid.p. 62)).
      From verbalization-conception people can  go  two  ways  (because  the
distance can be of the order of exposure or of the order of  contemplation),
neither of which ways is accessible  to  animals:  either  to  abstract  the
object into a purely speculative object of consideration  without  distances
of exposure and look for the propter quid or reason for the  quia  (this  is
the speculative route prompted by the supposedly pure, disinterested  desire
to know), or keep the concrete way in which the object is related  to  their
(and perhaps others') needs and desires and deliberate as to what is  to  be
done. In the latter case, another bifurcation: either  deliberation  because
they are exposed and have to respond, but there is some time and the  course
of action is not  predetermined  (Is  Carthago  delenda?),  or  instrumental
thinking about the how to achieve the end, because the  end  doesn't  demand
deliberation (for instance, AIDS is to be cured, but the means are still  to
be discovered-invented).*
       *  Langer  distinguishes   between   connotation   (conception)   and
denotation (reference). In the case of proper names the conception is  of  a
special type. But there are many other  types.  What  is  conceived  may  be
singular or plural, abstract  or  concrete.  Furthermore,  we  do  not  only
conceive and communicate through substantives (proper and common names)  and
predicative judgments for consideration  and  assent,  but  also  make  (and
communicate through) practical  judgments,  and  we  express  desires,  give
orders, beg, salute, confess, etc.

      Concerning the connotation and denotation of names. In the  first  two
chapters of Verbum  Lonergan  seems  to  be  referring  exclusively  to  the
connotation and denotation of names. (Moreover, he  seems  to  be  referring
exclusively to the connotation of  common  names  (universality,  uniformity
characteristic of 'scientific' definitions and judgments [see pp.  152-153].
What is worse, from my particular point of view, is that he  wrongheadedly--
following Aquinas--includes among the common names "God," who  is  a  proper
name of the order of interpersonal exposure, a Thou,  not  an  It,  who  can
only be met within distances of reciprocal exposure that obtain through  His
self-revelation. For instance,  on  p.  157  and  note  84  ibid.,  Lonergan
follows Aquinas in placing theology  with  metaphysics  as  the  disciplines
that abstract from quantity as well as sensible quality and  the  conditions
of change. Obviously, if such is indeed the case, "God" cannot be  a  proper
name that denotes a  personal  singular,  and  it  cannot  be  used  in  the
vocative. (See pp. 152-153: "Names are signs of meanings, and  meanings  are
similitudes of things;  it  follows  that  names  refer  to  things  through
concepts in our intellects; and so the measure of the use of  names  is  the
knowledge in our intellects. Because we know the essence of  man,  the  name
'man' signifies the definition which expresses the essence of  man.  But  we
do not know the essence of God,  and  so  since  meaning  is  consequent  to
knowledge we cannot use names to express the essence of God."
      But do 'Thous,' persons involved in  interaction,  exposed  characters
in a story, have essences, as do objects denoted by common names  and  which
cannot be called in the vocative? Lonergan asks the question "What is  man?"
and whether there is an essence of man on p. 15, but  he  is  interested  in
speculative-scientific knowledge  and  is  talking  not  about  the  exposed
subject but about the objectified phenomenon of a human  body.  In  Sartrean
terms, he is speaking about the eye seen, not about the eye seeing.
      Notice that what Lonergan calls a definition is a "conception" of  the
intelligible (not of the merely descriptive or sensitive) order, that is,  a
prospective propter  quid.  Correspondingly,  a  "judgment"  is  a  sort  of
rationally guaranteed "denotation" of the  connoitation,  that  is,  of  the
concept. Now this intelligible  order  is  not  only  purely  objective  but
impersonal. Indeed, not only is the thinker not personally  exposed  to  the
object, but the object itself is such that  it  doesn't  make  interpersonal
exposure to it possible at all, for it is an "It"  of  the  abstract  causal
order, an it that has an essence, a nature.
      In this connection, the degrees of  abstraction  are  interesting.  In
the first degree--the case of the physical sciences--time  and  space  (here
and there, now and then) are neutralized as irrelevant. What  remains  as  a
result of the abstraction is the behavior (of the observable  object)  whose
propter quid is to be understood. In the second degree  of  abstraction--the
case of mathematics--"all mathematics prescinds from all sensible qualities-
-from colors, sounds, tactile experiences, tastes, odors; the color  of  the
geometrical figure, of  the  arithmetical  or  algebraic  symbol,  is  never
relevant to the mathematical theorem. The difference between  a  perspective
geometry and a science of optics is that the manner in which light  acutally
does move is relevant to the latter but irrelevant to the former; if  it  is
true that the light rays bend, then optics has  to  be  corrected,  but  not
perspective  geometry"  (Verbum,  p.  41).  "Finally,  the  third  degre  of
abstraction prescinds from all matter, individual and common,  sensible  and
intelligible,  to  treat  of  'ens,  unum,  potentia  et  actus,   et   alia
huiusmodi.'  It  does  so,   because   metaphysical   theorems   are   valid
independently  of  any  sensible  matter  of  fact  and  any  condition   of
imagination"  (Ibid.,  p.  42.  Cf  also  the  more  developed  section   on
abstraction, pp. 151-168, where it is clear  that  what  interests  Lonergan
and Aquinas is scientific knowledge: "This clear  reduction  of  meaning  to
knowledge suggests that one has better approach the problem  of  abstraction
on a profounder level, namely, that of  knowledge  and  especially  that  of
science. Now science is of the necessary and  universal;  but  all  material
things are contingent and particular" [p. 153].
      On pp. 176-180 there is a summary of the three moments of abstraction-
-"objective   abstraction,"   i.e.   phantasm   or   imagined   object   for
consideration in view of  understanding;  "apprehensive  abstraction,"  i.e.
actual  understanding  of   what   objective   abstraction   presented   for
understanding; and "formative abstraction"  (or  rather  "separation")  that
sets up the object that is apart from material conditions by meaning  it  or
definining it. "But while formative  abstraction  can  posit  the  universal
apart from any instance, still the act of meaning can  mean  the  individual
just as easily as it can mean the universal; but it means  the  univeral  in
virtue of apprehensive abstraction and it means the particular in virtue  of
consequent  indirect  knowledge  of  the  particular;  and  so   while   the
particular   can   be   meant,   it   cannot   be   defined   explanatorily,
quidditatively" (p. 180).
