---
title: "98-dec-1-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1998/98-dec-1-1"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v2.3
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\98-DEC-1 Dec. 3, 98

ON STATEMENTS AND STATEMENTS

“...tout cela... est une sequelle , ou simplement une manifestation, du philosophisme endémique dans l’Eglise depuis ses origines mais qui s’est installé à demeure dans la Scolastique depuis le XIIIe siècle . Pour un St Thomas et quelques autres, qui ont magnifiquement dévoré l’obstacle, et se sont même hissés et haussés sur lui, des centaines de ‘rationalistes’ de bas vol ont buté dessus” (E. Gilson to de Lubac, Mémoire sur l’occasion de mes écrits , Culture et Verité, Namur, 1989), p. 127. My emphasis).

“There are, however, two characteristics found in St .Thomas which indicate the beginning of a change of orientation which was gradually brought about in the theology of the Schoolmen. On the one hand, the process of conceptual analysis proper to Scholasticism eventually led, by becoming more rigid, to a categorical distinction between the intellect and the will.. . On the other hand, at least in certain texts, the opposition between ‘seeing’ and ‘believing’... is understood by St. Thomas in such a way that he seems to consider faith mainly as a sort of imperfect knowledge, midway between opinion and science... ... in other words, to go beyond faith so as to attain vision.. .” (De Lubac, The Christian Faith, pp. 306-307.

But see from p. 303 through p. 314).

Searle’s theory of language

Reduced to its bear bones, Searle’s theory of language seems to me to be reducible, at least for the purposes I am pursuing here,  to the following  three points: (1) Speech-acts as the basic linguistic unit. (2) Saying what is meant as the distinctive characteristic of language. (3). The distinction between the illocutionary and the perlocutionary effects of language and their comparative linguistic importance.

The first point is too well known to deserve explanation. Searle expresses it as follows: “The unit of linguistic communication is not, as has generally been supposed, the symbol, word or sentence, or even the token of the symbol, word, sentence, but rather the production or issuance of the symbol or word or sentence in the performance of the speech act.  To take the token as a message is to take it as produced or issued token. More precisely, the production or issuance of a sentence token under certain conditions is a speech act, and speech acts are the basic or minimal units of linguistic communication” (SA, p. 16).  On this point I am in full agreement with Searle. I will, therefore, deal only with the latter two, which I find more problematic.

Language means

What fundamentally distinguishes language from all other rule-governed human activities, such as games, is, in Searle’s view, that language is meaningful in that it communicates meaning by expressing what is meant.

“Characteristically, when one speaks one means something by what one says; and what one says, the string of sounds that one emits, is characteristically said to have meaning... The pieces in a game of chess are not characteristically said to have a meaning, and furthermore, when one makes a move one is not characteristically said to mean anything by that move” (SA, pp. 42-43).

According then to Searle, the linguistic sounds emitted or the marks made– have meaning . How come? In many cases, perhaps in most cases, they have meaning because they actually say in their propositional content what is meant, which makes the words of a speech act obviously different from the pieces and moves in a game of chess. However, the difference is not equally obvious in all cases , for  “not all illocutionary acts have a propositional content, for example, an utterance of ‘Hurra’ does not, nor does ‘Ouch” (SA, p. 30). “Saying fits statements but not greetings,” (SA, p. 68). . But how is meaning communicated when what is meant is not said, that is, is not expressed propositionally? By conventional equivalence within a given language to the cases in which what is meant is expressed propositionally. Indeed, “Hello”  has no propositional content, it doesn’t say  “I salute you”; however, within the conventions of the  English language, this sound “ counts as, ” that is, counts as saying that. “I promise” doesn’t express propositionally “I sincerely promise” but counts as saying that. “The hammer is on the table” doesn’t express propositionally “I sincerely believe that the hammer is on the table” but counts as saying that.

But how does Searle know that non-propositional acts are illocutionary, that they have meaning? Because their meaning (what they express non-propositionally, or what they “count as”) can be expressed propositionally and is, therefore, equivalent to a propositional illocutionary act. IN OTHER WORDS, MEANING IS SOMETHING TO BE UNDERSTOOD, AND ONLY WHAT IS EXPLICITLY OR EQUIVALENTLY PROPOSITIONAL CAN BE UNDERSTOOD.. Is this not, after all, the whole point of the principle of expressibility: Whatever can be meant can be said, that is, can be said propositionally?   

Yet, at least in his explicit views, Searle denies that all speech acts are sayings, that is, express in words what they mean or are propositional . “... there is a close connection between saying and the constative class of illocutionary acts. Indeed, Austin’s original insight into performatives was that some utterances were not sayings, but doing of some other kind ., But this point can be exaggerated. A man who says ‘I (hereby) promise’ not only promises, but says he does. That is, there is indeed a  connection between sayings and constatives, but it  is not as close as one might be inclined to think” (SA, p. 68). Now Austin may think whatever he thinks, but Searle himself begins in the just quoted statement to reduce the difference between performatives and constatives, and, as we shall see, will exclude the typical effect of  performatives from the linguistic realm, thereby assimilating performatives to constatives, to something to be understood. .  

Searle’s theory of language takes very seriouslyAlthough Searle, as we jus saw However, language, like games,  is also rule-governed. As one cannot plays chess if one doesn’t follow the rules, so one cannot comunicate what one means by emitting any sounds whatsoever, for not all sounds or signs are words, and not any words are apt to communicate what one means. One communicates WHAT ONE MEANS in a given language and, except for very simple messages that can be communicated through gestures, communication doesn’t obtain without following the conventions of a given language. Searle explains this important aspect of his theory of language by means of an ingenious example (SA, pp. 44-45). . An American soldier during world war II encounters a group of Italian soldiers. The American knows no an, but he happens to remember from a course in German language he took years before a famous  verse from Goethe, “Kennst du das Land wo die Zitronen blühen?,” and shouts it from afar to the Italians in the hope that they will take him for a German and not capture him. The verse quoted by the American means “Do you know the land where the lemon-trees flourish?” not “I’m German.” Still, as Searle suggests, the American may entertain the hope, however slight, that the Italians will take him for a German because he said something in German. However, Searle argues, even if the American succeeded in being taken for a German thanks to his linguistic trick, it wouldn’t be a case of genuine linguistic communication, a genuine speech act, because the meaning the American intends to communicate is that he is German, and the German sentence uttered doesn’t mean or express at all what the speaker intends to communicate but something totally different.

This is how Searle explains the point:

“... what we can mean is at least sometimes a  function of what we are saying. Meaning is more than a matter of intention, it is also at least sometimes a matter of convention...  In the performance of an illocutionary act in the literal utterance of  a sentence, the speaker intends to produce a certain effect by means of letting the hearer to recognize his intention to produce that effect; and furthermore, (if he is using the words literally), he intends this recognition to be achieved in virtue of the fact that the rules for using the expressions he utters associate the expression with the production of that effect” (SA, p. 45).

.

And again:

“Characteristically, when one speaks one means something by what one says; and what one says, the string of sounds that one emits [or the marks one makes (p. 42)], is characteristically said to have meaning.

\

Curiously, if in the case of a propositional expression the words uttered don’t “have the meaning” the speaker intends to convey, the act is not an illocutionary one, even if the effect intended obtains. By contrast, in the case of non-conventional, non-verbal gestures that count as “Get out,” or even of mere animal behavior that incarnates the desire to be let out and thus counts as sort of “Let me out,” there is illocution, for the gesture or the behavior count as what the speaker wanted to communicate, and therefore what is understood or known is what the speaker intended to communicate. Why this? Because in the former case it is against the rule–and the rule has primacy over the communicative intention .

A third important aspect of Searle’s theory of language in connection with meaning

is that anything that can be meant can be expressed linguistically. This he calls “the principle expressibility, which he formulates as follows:

I take it to be an analytic truth about language that whatever can be meant can be said. [WHY NOT “CAN BE COMMUNICATED”?] A given language may not have the syntax or a vocabulary rich enough for me to say what I mean in that language but there are no barriers in principle to supplementing the impoverished language or saying what I mean in a richer one (SA, p. 17).

Combining the facts that, on the one hand, speech acts have generally to be expressed according to the conventional rules of a particular language and that, on the other hand, there has to be a language in which anything that can be  meant can be said, Searle concludes that he can, without loss, reduce the study of what Saussure called “ parole ” to what he called  “ langue,” , that is, reduce what is meant to what is actually said:

There are, therefore, not two irreducibly distinct semantic studies, one a study of the meaning of sentences and one a study of the performance of speech acts. For just as it is part of our notion of the meaning of a sentence that a literal utterance of that sentence with that meaning in a certain context would be the performance of a particular speech act , so it is part of our notion of a speech act that there is a possible sentence (or sentences) the utterance of which in a certain context would in virtue of its (or their) meaning) constitute a performance of that speech act ” (SA, pp. 17-18)]

   [Hence the Serlean equivalence LANGUE-PAROLE: “...it [the pple of expressibility] enables us to equate rules for performing speech acts with rules for uttering certain linguistic elements , since for any possible speech act there is a possible linguistic element the meaning of which (given the context of the utterance) is sufficient to determine that its literal utterance is a performance of precisely that speech act. To study the speech acts of promising or apologizing we need only study sentences whose literal and correct utterance would constitute making a promise or issuing an apology. - The hypothesis that the speech act is the basic unit of communication, taken together with the pple of expressibility, suggests that there are a series of analytic connections between the notion of speech acts, what the speaker means, what the sentence (or other linguistic element) uttered means, what the speaker intends, what the hearer understands, and what the rules governing the linguistic elements are ” (SA, pp. 20-21]. [“It still might seem that my approach is simply, in Saussurian terms, a study of ‘parole’ rather than ‘langue.’ I am arguing, however, that an adequate study of speech acts is a study of langue . There is an important reason why this is true which goes beyond the claim that communication necessarily involves speech acts (SA, pp. 17-18).

. Here, incidentally, is another point at which our analogy between performing speech acts and playing games breaks down. The pieces in a game like chess are not characteristically said to have a meaning, and furthermore, when one makes a move one is not characteristically said to mean anything by that move ” [WHY NOT, IF A MOVE COUNTS AS YOU ARE CHESSMATED? BECAUSE THE POINT IS NOT TO CONVEY A MEANING] (SA, pp. 42-43. My emphasis) .

“Some very simple sorts of illocutionary acts can indeed be performed apart from any use of any conventional devices at all, simply by getting the audience to recognize certain of one’s intentions in behaving in a certain way [Note 1: Such cases are more limited than one might suppose. Facial expressions and gestures such as pointing have a heavy element of convention]. And these possibilities show us the limitations and weaknesses of the analogy with games, for one cannot, e.g., score a touchdown at all apart from invoking certain conventions (rules). [LANGUAGE IS NATURAL IN A CERTAIN SENSE, WHEREAS GAMES ARE TOTALLY ARTIFICIAL OR CONVENTIONAL]. But the fact that one can perform some illocutionary acts while standing outside a natural language, or any other system of constitutive rules should not obscure the fact that in general illocutionary acts are performed within language in virtue of certain rules , and indeed could not be performed unless language allowed the possibility of their performance . One can in certain special circumstances ‘request’ someone to leave the room without employing any conventions, but unless one has a language one cannot request of someone that he, e.g., undertake a research project on the problem of diagnosing and treating mononucleosis in undergraduates in American universities. Furthermore, I wish to argue, some system of rule governed elements is necessary for there to be a certain type of speech act, such as promising or asserting . My dog can perform certain simple illocutionary acts. He can express pleasure and he can ask (request) that he be let out. But his range is very limited, and even for the types he can perform, one feels that it is partly metaphorical to describe them as illocutionary acts at all” (SA , pp. 38-39). And concerning reference Searle claims that a dog that has been trained to bark at the arrival of its master is not thereby referring to its master. [NOTICE THAT THE SIMPLE ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS A DOG CAN PERFORM ARE AT BEST PERLOCUTIONARY BECAUSE THEY ARE NOT PROPOSITIONAL OR CONSTATIVE. THEY ARE NOT EVEN PERLOCUTIONARY NON-BEHAVIORAL, LIKE A HUMAN KISS IS, FOR DOGS SHOW AFFECTION OUT OF INSTINCT, NOT ‘REFLECTIVELY’, NOT WITH THE INTENTION OF SAYING] .

The distinction between illocutionary and perlocutionary effects and their relative linguistic importance

All genuine speech acts intend to communicate a particular meaning by saying propositionally or at least “counting as” what is meant by the speaker by virtue of the sounds emitted or the gestures performed by the speaker . Let us now introduce a further important aspect of Searle’s theory of language that concerns the nature of meaning. In Searle’s view,   linguistic meaning is, b y its very communicative nature, something  to be understood or known by the addressee, for otherwise communication doesn’t obtain. Therefore, all speech-acts intend as their essential effect to produce understanding on the addressee’s part, for they are communicative acts. As Searle succintly expresses this point, “The characteristic intended effect of meaning is understanding” (SA, p. 47). This effect of being understood or known Searle calls the “illocutionary effect” of language (see ibid.).  Thus, the illocutionary effect intended in the speech-act “Pass me the book “ is to make known or understood  the speaker’s intention . And if only the addressee understands that the speaker is asking him or her to pass the book, the speech-act is successful as a speech act.

However, in addition to being understood, some speech-acts also intend to produce other effects which are not identical to understanding. Thus, through the demand “Pass me the book” the speaker also intends the behavioral effect of having the book passed to her by the addressee. Searle calls the effects that are different from and in addition to understanding, such as the conduct of  passing the book, “perlocutionary” effects.

Now, Searle maintains that whether or not the perlocutionary effects intended by the speaker are actually achieved is linguistically accidental, for being understood is the necessary and sufficient condition for a any speech-act to be successful. Thus,  if I give you the order “Get out of this room,” and you understand the order I gave you, the speech-act is successful as a linguistic act, even if you disobey my order, for speech-acts are essentially acts of communication of a  meaning  to be understood and nothing else.

To summarize: all speech-acts, as linguistic acts, intend the illocutionary effect of being understood, and they are successful as linguistic acts if they are understood, for communicating a meaning to be understood is the essential linguistic effect. In addition, speech-acts may, and sometimes do, also intend to achieve effects different from understanding; but whether or not these perlocutionary effects are actually achieved is linguistically accidental, for the meaning is communicated if what is said is actually understood by the addressee, regardless of whether the perlocutionary effects intended obtain or not.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Serlean distinction between the illocutionary and the perloctionary

The two closely interrelated points of Searle’s theory of language so far presented disturb me, to wit: his interpretation of meaning as something to be understood, and his correlative reduction of the perlocutionary effects to a secondary, linguistically accidental, feature. I will deal with each of these points as I explore Searle’s fundamental distinction between the illocutionary and perlocutionary effects.

The perlocutionary effects that involve an action by the addressee

         As we know, in Searle’s view, the necessary and sufficient condition for a speech-act to be successful as a speech-act is that what is meant by the speaker be understood or known by the addressee, regardless of whether any perlocutionary effects are also intended, and  regardless of whether or not the perlocutionary effects are achieved, when intended.. This implies, however, that  the perlocutionary effects are linguistically accidental, and only the illocutionary effect, namely understanding, is essential. For my part, as a native  user of language –and this precisely is the basis on which Searle grounds his theory of language– I find this characterization of language erroneous.

To refer to a concrete instance, Searle’s position amounts to claiming that when I request you “Pass me the book,” what I intend or mean is that you understand or know or be informed that I intend for you to pass me the book, not that you actually perform the action of passing me the book . Of course, Searle doesn’t deny that I want you to pass me the book; what he denies is that your passing me the book is linguistically significant, since whether or not this effect obtains doesn’t affect the success of the communicative linguistic act, which is fully achieved by its being understood..

According, then, to Searle,  if I put a revolver on you and give you the order “Give me all the money you have on you,” what I supposedly  intend as a linguistic agent is that you understand or become informed of my intention of having you give me all the money you have on you, not that you actually give me the money. For my part,  I maintain that what I, the speaker, mean to achieve by virtue of my speech act is , not to inform the addressee of my intention-- in which case mere understanding would be required and sufficient , as Searle claims-- but to have the addressee actually give me the money by virtue of my speech act of command. Furthermore,  I  maintain that if in the case at hand the addressee tells me, who am holding her up, that she understands what I mean, and  is therefore informed of my intention, but doesn’t give me the money, not only will the addressee not make any sense as a user of language, but she will thereby place herself in great danger of being killed. After all, I insist, what I want, and want to achieve linguistically rather than by means of physical force , is that the money  be actually given to me. Now, wouldn’t the addressee, in real life, and any other competent user of language for that matter, agree with me rather than with Searle on this point?

I suppose that Searle would rejoin that if the addressee doesn’t understand or gets linguistically informed of my intention, she or he will not, and cannot, pass the book to me. But this is precisely the point of our disagreement. For Searle, such understanding may be a necessary condition for the action or perlocutionary effect to obtain, but the action itself is in no way part and parcel of the linguistic meaning; it is; rather something additional to the meaning of the speech-act  and, thus, linguistically accidental. In other words, being a competent speaker of a language is making oneself understood by virtue of the conventionally meaningful sounds one emits, and being a competent hearer is understanding what the speaker intends to communicate by understanding.   What I claim, by contrast, is that being a competent speaker amounts to emitting conventionally meaningful signs in a given language, by virtue of which meaningful sounds one aims at obtaining from the addressee the intended conduct, and that being a competent hearer in a given language amounts to producing the conduct intended by the speaker through the emission of the conventionally meaningful  sounds. In other words, in my view, the action involved in the case of the speech-acts that have perlocutionary force  is itself linguistic , for it is the effect meant by the speaker and it is the action executed by the addressee as a result of and in response to the speaker’s intention as expressed ins the emission of meaningful sounds. [EXACTLY AS THE SPEAKER’S WORDS EXPRESS THE ACTION INTENDED BY THE SPEAKER, SO THE ADDRESSEE’S ACTION EXPRESSES THE RESPONSE INTENDED BY THE ADDRESSEE TO THE SPEAKER’S INTENTION AND IS, THEREFORE, A LINGUISTIC ACTION].  Thus, if the action doesn’t obtain, the speech-act fails as a speech act, even if the addressee understands or knows (in Searle’s sense to be discussed below) the speaker’s intention. In short, when I give an order, I intend for the addressee to obey my order, not merely to know that I am giving that order. This is why when I obey a command my action is an act of obedience , not merely an action that obtains accidentally after a command by a speaker. This is why, too, when I give money to someone who begs me for money my action is an act of gracious rather than forced giving , for my action is the linguistic effect intended by the speaker’s speech-act of begging.  

Can my view be supported by something more persuasive than just my authority as a competent speaker and hearer of English against Searle’s authority? I think so. Imagine a Serlean young child who would hear all the orders given to him by his mother just as communicating the knowledge of his mother’s intentions, so that the child would in no way feel obligated by virtue of the linguistic command to obey by performing the actions commanded. Could we really say that this child understands what receiving an order, linguistically, amounts to? And, were the case such, could this child, if punished for his disobedience, understand that he is being punished and why, given that he supposedly did all he was supposed to do as a competent hearer of language, namely, be informed of his mother’s intention? And could this child who hears language in this Serlean way, be in his turn capable of giving any orders when he becomes an adult, given that he thinks that what he is doing when he commands something is not really demanding an action as an act of obedience but merely making understood or known to the addressee his linguistic intention? And could this child, when he becomes an adult, scold a child of his who tells him that she has been informed of his command but neither performs the action commanded nor thinks that she is expected to perform that action by virtue of the command ?  In short, my argument against Searle is that if we all had learned language in a Serlean linguistic universe, that is, in a universe in which the actions commanded never followed the commands, because after all the actions themselves are linguistically accidental, nobody would have ever learned to speak and hear what we speakers and hearers of language call language. For we simply do not speak and hear language  the way Searle thinks--at least not as far as the speech-acts are concerned whose perlocutionary force demands an action or conduct or behavioral effect on the addressee’s part.

But let me be more precise. In identifying language with what is or can be said on the basis that what is sadi expresses what is meant, and in reducing his object of study to what is or can be said, Searle actually reduces his object of study to the study of what is or can be said, believing that he is thereby studying language. Now,  what is or can be  said, be it orally or written, is a text, and a text is by its very nature something to be understood . What, indeed, can be done about a text but to understand it? But this amounts to reducing language to something to be understood. Which is what Searle does. Searle realizes, however, that in linguistic communication other effects than mere understanding are at least sometimes intended and at least sometimes achieved. These he calls the perlocutionary effects, by contrast to the illocutionary effect which consists in understanding or making known. As Searle, though, has already reduced language to text, and text is something to be understood, he already has reduced meaning to something to be understood. Hence his systematic exclusion of all the linguistic effects that are different from understanding from the study of language as such. The odd result is that when I ask you to pass me the bread, I don’t intend, strictly speaking, for you to pass me the bread, but only that you understand that I am asking you to pass me the bread. Thus,  I succeeded as a speaker and you succeeded as a hearer of English if you understand what I am asking, even if you don’t get it that what I want is to have the bread passed to me by you!

It is interesting to remark that this is exactly the way in which we understand what is said when we are learning a foreign language. Thus, in class of French, I understand what my teacher means by “Passez-moi le pain,” but I don’t think that she wants me to actually pass ser the bread, because in that situation we are not involved in actual linguistic commerce but in an exercise in which language is reduced to “ langue ,” to text, to something that is merely to be understood. Now, this is what Searle identifies as language, and this is the way he thinks that language actually functions. Most certainly, however, French people don’t speak and hear French in that way. Nor, for that matter, does anybody speak any language in that way. THE AMERICAN SOLDIER IS AN INTERESTING CASE IN POINT.

distinguishing the illocutionary from the perlocutionary effects of language the way he does Searle separates linguistic communication, which consists in understanding, from action which consists in producing effects which are different from understanding. For Searle, language is essentially communicative, and communicating is making known or understood,  by virtue of sounds or signs that possess a conventional meaning, what the speaker intends to communicate. Since language is a communicative system, its success depends exclusively on its making understood or known what the speaker intends to communicate.   This is Through some speech acts, in addition, the speaker also intends to achieve certain effects on the addressee, or to have certain affects achieved by the addressee.

what is to be understood from what is to be actually done or performed. Moreover, he interprets the addressee’s action intended by the speaker as part of the meaning to be understood rather than as an action to be actually performed, with the result that the actual, performance of the action is accidental to the communicative act. action, not to aneal action toexcludes the action demanded by the speech act

The perlocutionary effects that do not involve an action by the addressee

In order to be complete concerning the speech-acts that involve the kind of effects Searle calls perlocutionary I have to introduce a distinction that Searle himself doesn’t make, at least not in a significant way. Indeed, under the category of acts that have perlocutionary force Searle places indistinctly both those linguistic acts that demand an action from the addresseee, of which speech-acts I  just spoke, as well as  those linguistic acts that simply aim at producing on the addressee an effect that is different from understanding, but not an effect that consists in an action on the adressee’s part.. Examples of this latter kind are saluting or insulting, among many others. ^(F1)

Why is the distinction I am suggesting between the two types of speech-acts important? Because in the case of the speech-acts that don’t demand an action on the addresse’s part the perlocutionary effect intended may more plausibly be identified with understanding, as Searle contends is the case with all perlocutionary acts. Indeed, Searle argues that when I salute somebody my speech act is fully succcesful if only the addressee understands or becomes informed of my intention of saluting him or her, for the whole point of saluting is to make known to the addressee that he or she is being saluted, and this obtains when the addressee understands that he or she is being saluted . For my part,  I claim that even in the case of the perlocutionary acts of this second type Searle is wrong in reducing meaning to something to be understood or known.

I think that, contrary to Searle’s claim, saluting is not communicating something to be understood, but intending to produce an effect irreducible to understanding.. Suppose that somebody is saluting  you from the other side of the street and you don’t see him or her, so that you don’t know that you are being saluted. Searle, I think, would say that this proves that saluting is a speech act that intends the speaker’s intention of saluting the addressee to be understood or known by the addressee, and precisely because this didn’t obtain in the example I am considering the speech-act failed as a speech-act of saluting. I disagree. For if, in reference to your failure to notice that you are being saluted, I tell you that you are being saluted by your friend who is on the other side of the street, I am making known to you that you are being saluted, but I am not saluting you. Informing somebody that she is being saluted is not the same as saluting her. Nor, pace Searle, is the person who salutes me informing me that she is saluting me; she is saluting me.. In short, saluting is not notifying someone that she is being saluted either by propositionally stating that she is being saluted or by making a gesture that counts as saluting, for the effect intended in saluting is not communicating a piece of information.

My point is that by identifying understanding as the essential linguistic effect Searle implicitly reduces all speech-acts to statements about the speaker’s communicative intentions . This is why he thinks that in the case of all speech-acts what is meant is something to be understood or known. Now, in the case of the speech-acts whose perlocutionary force demands an action on the addressee’s part, Searle’s position is unpersuasive, as I have already argued, for it is obvious that an action is irreducible to mere understanding and that the speaker intends that action to be performed by the addressee, not just to make his or her intention known.

Searle classifies such speech-acts as saluting or insulting as perlocutionary acts, which implies that they intend an effect in addition to, and different from, understanding, for otherwise they would be merely illocutionary. On the other hand, he reduces the effect of these speech-acts to mere understanding, for he claims that being saluted or insulted obtains by understanding that one is saluted or insulted and that there is no other effect produced by such acts. Why this ambiguity? We will find out if we ask ourselves why Searle classifies saluting and insulting as perlocutionary acts. I think he does that because it is opart of his theory of language that all speech acts aim at understanding as their essential effect. On the other hand, though, Searle doesn’t see what other effect than understanding is produced by these speech-acts, for no observable behavior in addition to understanding is involved ins this case. However, Searle cannot have it both ways. Either saluting and insulting are perlocutionary acts, and then they produce identifiable effects in addition to and different from understanding, or he is wrong in classifying them as a perlocutionary acts.

To make things clearer, let me present my own view by contrast to Searle’s. He thinks that what is going on in saluting is making known to the addressee the speaker’s intention of saluting the addressee, and that the addressee gets the message that he or she is saluted by understanding that intention. For my part, I think that in saluting the speaker has the intention of saluting the addressee, not of informing the addressee of his or her intention of saluting. I think, conequently, that the effect of saluting obtains, not by the addressee’s being informed of anything, since the speech act is not a statement of the speaker’s intention, but by the addressee’s getting the satisfaction exclusively produced by his or her being saluted, by being honorifically singled out and recognized by the salutator, which is precisely the effect intended by the salutator. Simnilarly the person who insults somebody by saying “you are a swine” intends to produce on the addressee the hurt characteristic of being insulted in that manner by the speaker, not to inform that the speaker thinks he is a swine. Of course, if one is insulted, one knows that one is insulted; however, insulting is not making known anything, and one is not insulted by knowing an objective fact.

Let me add some clarification concerning this subtle point. A kiss, in the case of human beings who are linguistic creatures and therefore live in the dimension of meaning, is, at least in certain circumstances, a gesture that expresses–and, when successful–communicates the love of the kisser for the kissed, and thereby produces in the kissed the satisfaction characteristic of being loved by the kisser, much as being told “I love you” would produce a comparable satisfaction. I contend that this satisfaction of being loved by the kisser is the perlocutionary effect intended by the kisser, not the notification that he or she is loved by the kisser and, consequently, the necessary and sufficient condition for this communicative gesture to be successful is for the kissed one to experience the satisfaction characteristic of being kissingly loved by the kisser. Thus, if the person kissed rejects the kisser, the communicative gesture fails as a speech-act, even if the person kissed knows or understands that the kisser intended to express his or her love. Well, my claim is that “Hi,” or “Hello,” or “How are you?” or a waving of the hand are also communicative gestures–genuine speech-acts-- that express the salutator’s intention of saluting, that is, of producing in the saluted one the pleasure of being saluted by the salutator, and they do not intend to inform of the speaker’s intention of saluting. . Similarly such insults as “You are a swine,” or “Go to hell,” are speech-acts that do not say anything (in Searle’s sense of “saying,” to wit: announcing, notifying, informing, making understood or known). They are expressive gestures, not statements. They are gestures that express the speaker’s intention of producing in the addressee the hurt characteristic of being insulted by the speaker.

Of course, Searle would argue that a kiss is not a speech-act, for what is characteristic of linguistic acts is, according to him, that they say , that is, express in words, what the speaker means. Now, kissing doesn’t say what it means. My answer is that is quite true that kissing doesn’t say anything in the sense of sating or enunciating, which is in Searle’s view the way in which language communicates. But is it true that a certain kind of kiss doesn’t say as much as “I love you,” in the sense of expressing the kisser’s love and of producing in the kissed person the satisfaction of being loved by the kisser? INCORRECT

THE POINT I WANT TO HIGHLIGHT is that Searle understands the ‘saying’ involved in speech acts as identical to ‘stating,’ and thus his view of language implies that speaking amounts to stating what one means . In fact, that is why, according to Searle, linguistic  meaning is something to be understood. For linguistic meaning is what is said or stated by a speaker to an addressee, and something stated is something to be understood. Hence, the essential or illocutionary linguistic effect is understanding or knowing what the speaker says or means, and understanding or knowing what is meant is the necessary and sufficient condition for the success of the speech-act..

In conclusion, Searle’s view of languageof language also proves to be wrong in the case of those perlocutionary acts that do not aim at obtaining an action on the addressee’s part. They function, rather, as gestures expressive of the speaker’s feelings toward the addressee, and they achieve their intended effects by producing their characteristic pleasure or pain in the addressee, much as the verbal expression “I love you” can be substituted without any expressive loss by a kiss or a caress..

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3) The case of statements: Illocutionary or perlocutionary speech-acts?

If my argument carries water, it is by now evident that Searle’s distinction between the illocutionary and the perlocutionary effects of language is invalid, at least in the way Searle draws  the distinction. Indeed, he maintains that all speech-acts are meant to produce the illocutionary effect, which consists in their meaning being understood, and that the perlocutionary acts produce an extralinguistic effect in addition to, and different from, understanding. I have argued, however,  that in the case of the speech-acts classified by Searle as perlocutionary there is no illocutionary effect, for there is no effect reducible to understanding, and there is no understanding involved.. Thus, it would seem, at this point of my exploration, that if there is an illocutionary effect of speech-acts that consists in understanding, as defined by Searle, it can obtain only in the case of statements. I will show, however, that even in the case of statements, there is no illocutionary effect as defined by Searle, that is, a linguistic effect that consists in mere understanding.

It is important, however, to begin with, to be characterize the kind of statements to which I will be referring. I am speaking of statements that refer to concrete objects in the world of our everyday experience, made by a speaker to a present addressee in concrete shared circumstances. I am not talking about explanatory statements of an object or an event, nor about statements that refer to other statements rather than to objects or events. For instance, all the statements I am making in this paper are explanatory of language, and they do not refer to concrete objects in the world of our everyday experience. By contrast, if in answer to a question of yours I tell you “The hammer is in the next room,” this is a statement of the kind I want to talk about.

Let us consider a concrete, particular instance. If you tell me that you are looking for the hammer and  you ask me “Where is the hammer?” and I answer you “The hammer is in the next room,” I expect you to proceed to the next room to get the hammer. If you don’t do that, I’ll be surprised, and I’ll probably repeat my statement. If again you don’t proceed to the next room, I will suspect that you didn’t understand what I said. But suppose I ask you whether you understood what I said and you answer that you did understand, but still you don’t go to the next room and don’t give any explanation for your not going. Then I’ll ask you why you don’t go to the next room to get the hammer. Suppose you answer me, “Why should I go to the next room to get the hammer?” “Well, you told me that you were looking for the hammer, and I just told you that it is in the next room.” “I understand,” you say, “but why should I go to the next room to get the hammer?”

I could prolong this absurd example, but there is no point to doing that. Why indeed is this example absurd? Because the person looking for the hammer says that she understands my statement that the hammer is in the next room, and yet doesn’t go to the next room to get the hammer and has no inkling that going to the next room to fetch the hammer would be the appropriate response or reply to the statement. And this is absurd, because she says that she understands my statement, but she really doesn’t. Indeed, the statement doesn’t refer the addresse to what is said or stated but to the real hammer-as object-desired-by the addresse. Hence , unless there are reasons that explain her not going to the next room to fetch the hammer (such as “I don’t believe your statement,” or “I’m not in a hurry...”), in these circumstances, understanding the statement amounts concretely to going to the next room to get the hammer; not, as Searle seems to assume, to having a mental picture that corresponds to, or “fits,” what is said. This is why, in the absence of an explanation for her not going to the next room, I am convinced   that the addressee doesn’t understand.

But suppose that she tells me that she understands perfectly my statement, and to prove it she translates it into French, ”Le marteau est dans la pièce a cote,” but still she doesn’t go to the next room to get the hammer, and she gives no explanation for her conduct, and she even confesses that she doesn’t see how her going to the next room or giving an explanation for not going are related to her understanding what I stated. Obviously, at least in my opinion as a competent user of language, this person doesn’t understand, no matter what she says and into how many languages she can correctly translate my statement. And I know that she doesn’t understand because the addressee’s going to the next room to get the hammer is constitutive of the  linguistic understanding of this statement in these circumstances. Such, indeed, is the way in which the statement “The hammer is in the next room” is meant to function under these circumstances, and such is the way in which any competent user of English would mean it as a speaker. In other words, the speaker means his or her statement not as a piece of objective information about the world to be simply registered by the addressee as a pure contemplator, as Searle thinks statements function. Rather, in the context of the addressee’s goal as an agent, the statement is meant to motivate the addressee to go to the next room to get the hammer .

By the way, the same would be the case among French users of language with the French statement, “Le marteau est dans la pièce a cote,” for that is the way in which statements made by agents who addresses other agents in a context of action function and are meant to function in all languages, at least in all the languages I know . They refer the addressee, to use my previous example, not to what is said or stated as object of contemplative understanding, as Searle assumes that statements refer, but to to the real hammer in the next room, to the hammer as object of practical desire for the addressee who is an agent.. That is why the statement “The hammer is in the next room” is expected by the speaker to be attended on the addressee’s  part by  the action of going to fetch it in the next room, and this is why any addressee who is a competent user of language knows that he or she is expected sto go to the next room.

In order to show that I am not speaking of exceptional cases but of the ordinary way in which the kind of statements of which I am speaking function, let us consider a couple of other examples. If I am in the same room with you, and the telephone rings, and I answer the phone, and tell you “Your mother is on the phone,” I expect you to take the phone and talk to your mother. If, however, you do nothing of the kind, and offer no explanation for not taking the phone, and you still claim that you understand what I said, I will maintain that you didn’t understand. The reason is, again, that in a context of action, in our everyday life, statements that refer to objects or events in the world inhabited by the speaker and addressee are meant to be understood performatively, not theoretically . In other words, if you really understand my statement, you perform the action of taking the phone, for that is what understanding performatively amounts to, and that is the way the statement is meant by the speaker. This is why, if you don’t perform the action of taking the phone and talking to your mother, I, the speaker, in the absence of a reason that explains why you didn’t take the phone, know that you didn’t understand, however strongly you may claim that you understand.  

Another example. I must have been about ten years old when one day, as I was waiting for my older brother at the door of the school which we both attended, I was told by another student that my brother had suffered a grave accident. What I was referred to linguistically by the statement was my brother being in a hospital after a serious accident. And the statement referred me to that not as object for contemplative understanding, but of performative understanding , that is, as something which was not an objective piece of information to be registered, but as something to be responded to in action. Anyway, my understanding as a user of language actually was of the latter kind, for as soon as I heard the statement I ran home as fast as I could to tell my mother what had happened. And when I, in my turn, stated to my mother what had happened, she herself didn’t register it as a piece of information to be contemplatively understood, but understood it performatively by running to the school in absolute anguish, which of course didn’t surprise me. What would have surprised me would have been if my mother had told me that she understood what I had said and had continued doing whatever she was doing at the time. Now, as it turned out in the particular case, the student who had told me about my brother’s accident had been joking in very bad taste and just wanted to scare me. But I believed his statement, as of course he intended to, and he was not surprised of my reaction of running home rather than continuing to wait for my brother at the school’s door. Now, at the time of this event, I was a child, and nobody had explained to me that statements were meant to be understood performatively. However, as a competent user of language, I heard the student’s statement performatively, as it was meant to be heard, and my mother, too, heard my statement performatively, as I had meant it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ her, which is the perlocutionary effect intended or meant by the speaker. However, Searle would observe that “Pass me the book” is not a fully explicit speech-act, in that its perlocutionary force is not fully expressed. Indeed, the action intended is explicitly meant, but whether it is intended as a result of a command, or of a simple request, or of begging, is not expressed.  Thus, when fully expressed, the perlocutionary force is different in the case of “I order you to pass me the book,” or “I reques t you to pass me the book ,” or “I beg you to pass me the book.” Thus, Searle would continue, if statements are meant to produce any other effect than their being understood, as I have suggested, their perlocutionary force, if they really had any, would show when their meaning is made fully explicit, for, as Searle claims, “whatever can be meant can be said.” But what is the action meant or intended by the speaker who states “Your mother is on the phone,” or “The hammer is in the next room”? Of course, the speaker could rather say “Talk to your mother on the phone,” or “Go to the next room and fetch the hammer,” if that is the speaker’s intention. But the meaning of the latter two speech acts, which are requests or commands, is not equivalent to the meaning of the former two speech-acts, which are statements. With this argument, therefore, Searle would feel vindicated in his view that statements are peculiar among speech-acts in that, by virtue of their grammatical meaning, they have no perlocutionary force . They simply and objectively state an object, an event, or a state of affairs to be as stated, and refer the addressee to that.

For this very reason, to refer to the example cited above, Searle doesn’t consider a For my purposes, the important point is that speech-acts, in certain cases, aim at producing what Searle calls a perlocutionary effect, that is, an extralinguistic effect, and sometimes they succeed in producing such an effect. This relates to the example of the American soldier. Although this soldier most probably knew nothing of the theory of the perlocutionary effects of language, he nonetheless had enough experience as a user of language to realize that certain pieces of language do not only produce the effect of being understood  but also produce an extralinguistic effect. And what this soldier was banking on was that his saying “Ich komme von dem Land...” would produce on the part of the people whom he addressed the extralinguistic effect of their not paying special attention to him instead of making him a prisoner.

The idea that language may also be performative rather than merely meaningful, as it had traditionally been emphasized, that is, that language may intend to achieve and sometimes succeed in achieving effects that are not merely understanding of what is meant, that aside from conveying a meaning to be  understood language can perform other extralinguistic effects, is a prominent feature of Searle’s views on language, which he traces back to Austin (p. 30). Yet, oddly enough for someone who brings to the fore the performative character of language, in the particular case of statements Searle seems to me to miss completely the performative force they sometimes have.

In this Searle is far from being alone. Actually, his blindness to this aspect of statements seems to me to be both typical of the philosophical tradition as well as extremely significant philosophically, as I will explain later.   

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Searle’s conception of linguistic meaning

I mentioned before that I found it ironic that Searle, whose views on language take into account the performative aspect of language, completely misses the performative character of the kind of statements I am referring to. Searle could argue, however, that he missed nothing, for

I attribute to statements a perlocutionary force that they actually  do not have. Indeed, he could argue that all speech-acts that intend an effect other than meaning convey their perlocutionary force, when fully explicit, by virtue of their meaning. Thus, for instance, “Pass me the book” expresses by virtue of its meaning the speaker’s intention of having the book passed to him or genuine speech-act the American soldier’s attempt to have the Germans believe that he is a German soldier by uttering “Ich komme von dem Land wo die Zitronen blüen,” even if it succeeded in achieving the American’s purpose of not being made a prisoner, because the words uttered don’t say at all what the American means, which is “I am a German soldier.” Language means by saying what the speaker means, and what is meant is what  is supposed to be understood by the addressee, for what is said, that is what is meant, is something to be understood. This explains why Searle views the actual achievement of perlocutionary effects linguistically accidental, for, to give a concrete example, the speech-act “I command you to pass me the book” is meant to convey the speaker’s intention to give that order, and therefore the speech-act is fully succcesful as a speech-act if only the addressee understands or comes to know that intention.

It is, then,  the core of Searle’s view of language that language is meaningful, that is, that all complete linguistic pieces or speech-acts convey a meaning by saying what is meant by the speaker, and that if they convey no meaning by expressing it in words they are not genuine linguistic acts, and that a speech act should be fully explicit, that is, say completely what it means. . Secondly, that linguistic meaning is something to be understood, and therefore that the necessary and sufficient condition for the success of the speech-act as such is that it be “understood” or “known” by the addressee. It is with this particular view of linguistic meaning as something to be understood or known that I disagree. In other words, I don’t think that the primary purpose of linguistic acts is to communicate something to be understood or known and, consequently, I don’t think that speech-acts succeed if only they are understood or, what is equivalent for Searle, if their meaning becomes known by the addressee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

such, since what is stated or meant is something to be understood. Period. Thus, if you understand that I am linguistically b egging you for bread, the speech-act is successful as such, since what a speech act i But this applies not only to statements, which by virtue of their meaning, that is, of what is  said or stated, aim only at producing the illocutionary effect of being understood, but also to those  speech- acts which by virtue of their to meaning aim at producing, in addition to being understood, other effects to be achieved by the addressee. Thus, the fully explicit speech-act ”I beg you for a piece of bread” aims at being understood, for it says or states that I beg you for a piece of bread , but , in addition to your understanding that, it aims at your graciously or without obligation giving me a piece of bread. The latter is an action that is not itself linguistic and, therefore, not essential for the success of a speech-act as s meant to do is communicate or make known the speaker’s intention it states.

By now a typical characteristic of Searle’s theory of language is emerging. His model of linguistic ‘saying’ is the case of statements, and the particular way in which Searle interprets statements is ‘saying something to be understood.’ Hence whatever other effect than being understood , though achieved thanks to language, is linguistically accidental, for it is not what the speech act means. Now, this identification of linguistic meaning with something stated to be understood begins to sound artificial when applied to those speech acts that aim at an effect to be achieved by the addressee, such as begging, commanding, forbidding, etc. Indeed, stating and begging, for example, are two different speech-acts . Can it be true, as Searle implies, that begging is a form of stating, namely, stating the intention of begging for something? Suppose that I tell you that I have the intention of begging our common friend Peter for $100.00, and that Peter happens to overhear our conversation. Thus Peter understands my stated intention of begging him

for $100.00. Is he thereby begged? I would say that I didn’t beg Peter; I just stated that I had the intention of begging Peter in the future. But I didn’t actually place myself in the humiliating position of begging Peter for $100.00, nor did I actually place Peter in the bind of having to decide whether or not to give me that money. Of course, Searle will say that my statement was not a speech-act of begging, because I did not address myself to Peter,  the intended  addressee

in the act of begging. But this answer only deviates the attention from the point that I am trying to make, to wit: that a theory of language that reduces what is meant in the case of any and every speech act to stating sounds artifical and suspicious. Is it true that when I beg I am stating that I beg? Whatever the case with Searle, at least this one competent speaker and hearer of language has his doubts.

But why does Searle begin with meaning conceived as mere understanding? Because Searle is a philosopher and, as such , he belongs in the philosophical tradition that, since the pre-Socratics and Socrates, has understood statements as expressing simply and objectively the object, or the event, or the state of affairs stated, and as referring the addressee or the hearer simply and objectively to the stated. Indeed, in the philosophical tradition by which Searle himself has been shaped, statements occupy a unique place, in that they are practically the only speech-act of professional interest to philosophers. And this is due, precisely, to the fact that statements are understood by philosophers to be the only speech acts that refers to what is the case objectively, and therefore the only speech act that can be true or false . A command may be silly or appropriate or cruel or whatever else, but it cannot be true or false. And the same is the case with all other speech acts, except statements. No wonder that philosophers, whose central interest is knowledge and truth, have concentrated their attention on statements to the exclusion of all other speech-acts. Though this is not strictly the case with Searle, for he explores other speech-acts and underscores their performative character due to their perlocutionary force, he nonetheless reduces their perlocutionary force to a meaning to be understood objectively, that is, to be known–exactly as statements are supposed to be understood--and relegates the  actual achievement of the perlocutionary effects to a secondary and merely accidental place.

Searle’s position amounts to saying that when I give an order, what I as a speaker intend is for the person addressed to understand that I am giving such an order (because the essence of language is to be meaningful, and meaning is something to be understood ), and that as a speaker I don’t intend my order to be carried out, or that I intend that only secondarily and accidentally. This shows, in my opinion, though Searle supposedly accepts the performative character of language, he doesn’t take it seriously, and by not taking it seriously–again, in my opinion–Searle’s theory of language is wrongheaded. Indeed, I maintain, as a competent speaker of English–and this is Searle’s own basic criterion--that when I give an order what I intend linguistically is for my order to be obeyed and carried out by the addressee, not my order to be understood as to its grammatical meaning, as Searle implicitly supposes.   

speech-acts, as explicitly argued by Aristotle in the Peri Hermeneias , forcefully seconded by his medieval commentator Thomas Aquinas.  

But perhaps this shouldn’t be surprising.  After all, for Searle, the essential feature of language is that it is meaningful, and meaning is something to be merely understood.. This is what Searle calls the “illocutionary effect” of language. As for the performative capacity of language, that is, its capacity  to produce other affects aside from understanding of what is said (this is what Searle calls the “perlocutionary effects”), it is not essential, since it is not intended in all speech-acts and since anyway the meaning to be understood is independent of whether or not such effects are intended or achieved.

No wonder, then, that Searle , who is interested only  in the meaning of speech acts, and is interested in the perlocutionary force of speech-acts only insofar as it is meant, that is, insofar as it is to be understood, for he deems linguistically irrelevant the actual achievement or lack thereof of the perlocutionary effect, missed the performative character of statements.

I have no quarrel with that. My disagreemnt concerns Searle’s conception of meaning.  For Searle, meaning is something to be “understood” or “known” –he uses the two words equivalently. From this it follows–and it is a consequence explicitly drawn by Searle--that for a speech-act to be successful as a speech-act it is both necessary and sufficient that what is meant by the speaker be understood or known by the addressee, regardless of whether or not  any perlocutionary effects are actually achieved, if and when intended.  This is why, for Searle, the performative character of language, that is, the intention of a perlocutionary effect, is not necessarily found in all speech-acts. This is why a speech act can convey a meaning even when no perlocutionary effect is intended, as is the case with statements. And this is also why the actual achievement or lack thereof of the perlocutionary effects, when they are intended, is irrelevant or merely accidental from the linguistic point of view.

Now, why does Searle maintain what he maintains? Because of his view of language. Language is meaningful, that is, expresses and communicates meaning, and meaning is something to be understood or known. Something to be understood is what any competent speaker mens to communicate, and that is what any competent hearer grasps when the speaker’s intention becomes known to him or her through understanding. Where exactly do I disagree with Searle?

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In short, the understanding I intend as a speaker on the addressee’s part is an understanding that is, so to say, incarnated in the addressee’s action of passing me the book. In other words, what I intend when I give an order is, not a speculative or theoretical understanding of my order that consists in sbeing informed of my order , but a practical or applicative understanding that consists in actually executing my order in obedience to it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

^(F1) “Correlated with the notion of illocutionary acts is the notion of the consequences or effects such acts have on the actions, thoughts, or beliefs, etc., or hearers. For example, by arguing I may persuade or convince someone, by warning him I may scare or alarm , by making a request I may get him to do something , by informing him I may convince him , enlighten , edify , inspire him , get him to realize ). The italicized expressions above denote perlocutionary acts”

Speech Acts , p. 25.
