---
title: "98-JUN-2"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1998/98-JUN-2.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


\wp\98\98-jun-2
                       For chapter 1 on Searle
(I) "The reason for concentrating on the study  of  speech  acts  is  simply
this: all linguistic communication involves linguistic  acts.  The  unit  of
linguistic communication  is  not,  as  has  generally  been  supposed,  the
symbol, word or  sentence,  or  even  the  token  of  the  symbol,  word  or
sentence, but rather the production or issuance of the  symbol  or  word  or
sentence in the performance of the speech  act.  To  take  the  token  as  a
message is to take it as a produced or issued token... More  precisely,  the
production or issuancce of a sentence token under certain  conditions  is  a
speech act, and speech acts... are the basic or minimal units of  linguistic
communication. A way to come to see this point is to ask  oneself,  what  is
the difference between regarding an object  as  an  instance  of  linguistic
communication and not so regarding it? One crucial difference is this.  When
I take a noise or a  mark  on  a  piece  of  paper  to  be  an  instance  of
linguistic communication, as a message, one of the things I must  assume  is
that the noise or mark was produced by a being more or less like myself  and
produced with certain kinds of intentions. If I regard the noise or mark  as
a natural phenomenon like the wind in the trees or a stain on the  paper,  I
exclude it from the class  of  linguistic  communication,  even  though  the
noise or  mark  may  be  indistinguihable  from  spoken  or  written  words.
Furthermore, not only must I assume the noise or mark to have been  produced
as a result of intentional  behavior,  but  I  must  also  assume  that  the
intentions are of a very special kind peculiar  to  speech  acts.  F.e.,  it
would be possible  to  communicate  by  arrangeing  items  of  furniture  in
certain ways. The attitutde one would have to  such  an  arrangement...,  if
one 'understood' it, would be quite different  from  the  attitude  I  have,
say, to the arrangement of furniture in this  rooom,  even  though  in  both
cases  I  might  regard  the  arrangement  as  resulting  from   intentional
behavior. Only certain kinds of intentions are adquate for  the  behavior  I
am calling speech acts. These  kinds  of  intentions  will  be  explored  in
chapter 2 John Searle, Speech Acts, Cambridge U Press, 1970, pp. 16-17).

(II) "When I say 'Hello' and  mean  it,  I  do  not  necessarily  intend  to
produce or elicit any state or action in my hearer other than the  knowledge
that he is being greeted. But that knowledege is  simply  his  understanding
what is said, not an additional response or effect.  Furthermore,  there  is
no perlocutionary effect  of,  f.  e..,  promising  which  will  distinguish
promises from firm statements of intention  and  emphatic  predictions.  All
three intend to create expectations in the heraer about the future,  but  'I
promise' does not mean 'I predict' or 'I intend.'  Any  account  of  meaning
must show that when I say 'I promise' or 'Hello' and mean it, I mean  it  in
exactly the same sense of mean as when I say 'Get  out'  and  mean  it.  Yet
Grice's account seems to suit only the last of these three sentences,  since
it is the only one whose meaning is such that  in  the  ordinary  cases  the
speaker who utters and means it  intends  to  produce  an  'effect'  on  the
hearer of the kind Grice discusses" (Speech acts, p. 46).
(III) "... there is a close connection between  saying  and  the  constative
class of illocutionary acts.  Saying  fits  statements  but  not  greetings.
Indeed,  Austin's  original  insight  into  performatives  was   that   some
utterances were not sayings, but doings of some other kind. But  this  point
can be exaggerated. A man who says 'I hereby promise' not only promises  but
says he does. That is, there is indeed  a  connection  between  sayings  and
constatives, but it is not as close as  one  might  be  inclined  to  think"
(Ibid., p. 68).
Searle on speech-acts in general and statements in particular
      S separates the illocutionary from the perlocutionary  and  makes  the
latter accidental. As a native speaker of  English,  he  tells  me  (also  a
native speaker  of  English)  that  when  I  communicate  linguistically  my
intention is always that what  I  want  to  communicated  be  understood  or
known. This applies to all cases of communication. In addition, sometimes  I
may want to produce other effects aside from having what I  say  understood.
For instance, when I give an order I intend two  things:  as  in  any  other
case of communication, I want my giving the order I give to  be  understood,
but I also want my order to be obeyed, executed. Now. though the  latter  is
a locutionary or genuinely lingusitic effect--a per-locutionary one--for  it
is parasitic on understanding what is said,  neither  the  occurrence  of  a
perlocutionary  intention   nor   the   susccessful   realization   of   the
perlocutionary  effect  intended  are  essential,  for  not  all  cases   of
communication involve a perlocutionary intention aside  from  understanding,
and  the  communication  itself  is  successful  if  unterstading   obtains,
independently of  whether  the  realization  of  the  perlocutionary  effect
intended  by  the  speaker  obtains.  By  contrast,  the  intention  of  the
illocutionary  effect  is  common  to  all  cases  of  complete   linguistic
communication (represented by speech acts).*
* There is an ambiguity here concerning  "understanding."  "I  want  you  to
study the diagnosis of mononucleosis." I want you counts as a request,  that
is,  constitutes  you  the  linguistic  addressee  as  requested.  But   not
automatically. By saying that I constitute myself as requester in regard  to
you,  and  intend  to  constitute  you  as  requested.  But,  in  linguistic
exchange, this requires your collaboration. Now, I don't  intend  to  inform
you that I request you,  but  to  have  you  requested.  But,  according  to
Searle, that is always the case: communicating  is  communicating  something
to be understood, by which understanding the addresse is  informed  of  what
the speaker wanted to communicate. This I  call  speculative  understanding,
speculative knowledge.
      Pace S, as a linguistic agent, as a native speaker of English, I  know
that when I tell you 'I want you to study...' I have no intention to  inform
you, but to get you to study... And if you get just "informed," as when  you
read  something  in  the  paper,  you  misunderstood  me,  my  communicative
intention failed. Informing and requesting are different  speech  acts,  for
they  express  diferent  intentions  and  intend  linguistically   different
effects. [S's mistake is equivalent to the mistake  of  those  wwho,  taking
the Bible for divine revelation, read the Bible as  implicitly  prefaced  by
"God  says  that,"  as  if  God  informed  us  of  something  to  be  merely
understood, or at best believed or asented to because  He  says  it,  rather
than as the establishment of an exposed relation  with  Him.]    If  S  were
right on  this  point,  the  illocutionary  force,  when  the  principle  of
expressibility is applied to this case, would yield, 'I Inform  you  that  I
request that you study...'  This  doesn't  make  sense.  Moving  to  "Kennst
du..': The speaker is certainly not atempting to inform the Germans that  he
is a German soldier, as S assumes, but attempting to have  them  respond  to
him as a German, which is  a  perlocutionary  effect.  The  speaker  is  not
intending two things  (informing  and  having  the  enemy  treat  him  as  a
German); he is intending only one thing, but intending  it  linguistically,*
by constituting the Germans as linguistically disposed to  treat  him  as  a
German. [* Searle, like the Greeks, thinks  of  two  things:  the  piece  of
information to be understood objectively, and the  emotion  or  attitude  or
behavior--he  doesn't  quite  know  hoe  to  identify  the   perlocutionary,
particularly  when  nothing  is  "said,"  that  is  no  reference   and   no
propositional content. I, by contrast, claim that there  is  oly  one  thing
involved in linguistic communication, the thing done  linguistically,  which
in the original spoken language of exposure, of which  all  literary  genres
are parasitic variations, gradually becomes a matter of prudence,  a  matter
of deliberation and decision both on the speaker's and  on  the  addressee's
side. Hence the speaker's intention can fail, since it is never  mechanical,
always subject to the addressee's cooperation. But this  doesn't  imply,  as
Searle assumes, that what is  intended  to  be  communicated  is  knowledge,
information.  It  is,  rather,  practical   knowledge,   desirous-knowledge,
agent's knowledge in situation  of  exposure,  to  be  transcended  (through
deliberation) in practical response. In other words, the response itself  is
always an act. In certain cases, as in 'Hello,' or 'You are  beautiful,'  or
"I love you,' etc., the response  is  addressed  directly  to  the  speaker.
Hence, denying salutation, which is wordless, is nonetheless  a  speech-act,
for it is in response to a speech-act. Caressing the other  in  response  to
"I love you' is a speech act, too, whether  or  not  it  is  accompanied  by
reciprocating words. In certain other cases, when there is reference to  the
shared world of action rather than to the  speaker  or  the  addressee,  the
response is only indirectly to  the  speaker--through  the  world  when  the
reference succeeds fully and the addressee is referred as intended, or  when
by failing to be referred the  addressee  responds  to  the  speaker  either
without words, just by his or her actions, or through words.
In short, the point I am making is that the addressee's fulfillment  of  the
speaker's act is itself an akction in response, another speech-act,  not  at
all the  speculative  understanding  Searle  has  in  mind,  which  at  best
combines with action (when and if it combines) in  an  accidental  and  non-
linguistic, non communicative way.
      Supose that this guy had known German and  told  the  enemy  "I  am  a
German soldier." According to Searle, whether or  not  he  would  have  been
believed, the communication  would  have  been  successful  if  the  Germans
understood what he said and that he said it. Not so according to me.
      Precisely what kind of "understanding" or knowledge does  Searle  have
in mind? Suppose now that the Germans understand what the guy says  and  say
that they believe what the guy stated, yet  treat  the  guy  as  a  foreign,
enemy soldier, and imprison him. This is not possible. Why not?  Because  it
is a matter of practical understanding in a  situation  of  encounter.  Here
the statement's  referent  is  not  purely  linguistic,  as  in  ""The  word
'demoiselle'  means  "Miss,"  in  French."  Furehtermore,  the   statement's
referent is not purely conceptual to be  understood,  as  in  a  geometrical
theorem. Nor is it, as in a geometrical theorem, something  to  be  assented
to on the baksis of evidence, be it conceptual or  of  the  sensible  order.
Nor is it, as in the case of the hanging bag of potatoes about to break  the
branch, to be understood purely  objectively  by  a  pure  observer  without
existential relationhip to it. [This is the kind  of  statement  and  assent
that Aquinas in his commentary about Peri hermeneias (cf.  wp\chant\excor-3)
has in mind when he says that "animus  hominis  per  rationem  inducitur  ad
consentiendum vero ex his quae  sunt  propria  rei,"  independently  of  any
relationship of exposure of an affective, desirous  subject  to  the  thing.
(Notice the difference between observing the behavior of lions  in  the  zoo
behind a protective barrier, and encountering lions in the  African  forest.
The 'object' is the same, but the situation--and consequently  the  attitude
(theoretical or speculative  in  one  case,  practical  in  the  other)  are
totally diferent, much as in the case of hearing a  sound  and  hearing  the
same sound in the middle of the night at  home).  Perception  is  always  in
reference to the  perceiver's  situation,  which  renders  possible  his/her
deliberative goals--coeffiicient of adversity and  favorableness,  passivity
which can go from almost total initiative on the agent's side to  almost  no
initiative but just the attitude to take towards the inevitable.   Here,  by
contrast to what Aquinas has  in  mind,  the  addressee  is  a  participant,
separated from the speaker to whom he is referred, by existential  distances
of  exposure.  (In  Aquinas's  words,  "Sed  rhetor  et  poeta  inducunt  ad
assentiendum ei quod intendunt, non solum per ea quae sunt propria rei,  sed
etiam per dispositionem audientis. Unde rhetores et poetae plerumque  movere
auditores nituntur provocando eos ad aliquas passiones"*).  [*  Notice  that
Aquinas, much like Searle, still thinks  of  assent,  which  corresponds  to
information, rather  than  of  disposition  to  act,  which  corresponds  to
practical understanding, and that, like Searle, he separates the objective--
ea  quae  sunt  propria  rei"  from   the   subjective--"per   dispositionem
audientis," the illocutionary from the perlocutionary, the speculative  from
the practical.]
      PRACTICAL UNDERSTANDING is existential understanding  by  an  exposed,
affectible  agent-patient,  separated  from  the   speaker   by   reversible
distances of mutual  exposure.  Hence  the  "dispositio  audientis"  to  the
speaker and to what he is referred  to  by  the  speaker.  In  the  case  of
"Kennst du..." the Germans are referred to the speaker as a German  soldier.
And, if the reference suceeds, if  they  accept  or  allow  their  being  so
referred to the speaker as German soldiers to a German, they have  to  treat
the guy as a German, for that precisely is what "believing"  means  in  this
case, much as believing in  the  Biblical  God  is  accepting  that  one  is
related to Him with distances of exposure, and therefore  falling  on  one's
knees before Him, among many other concrete ways  of  being  dispositionally
or actually related to Him. Sartre and Buber have spoken  of  this  in  less
clear ways.
       To  return  to  S.  His  supposed  understanding   of   language   is
understanding of speech acts, of words, as they  may  sound  in  a  clasroom
situation to  someone  whi  is  learning  the  language,  not  in  the  real
situation of linguistic commerce.

      S misunderstands the perlocutionary because he separates it  from  the
illocutionary. What he needs is a sort of  combination  of  both,  which  is
practical understanding,  a  practical-attitude-project-action  informed  by
the speaker's intention "freely" accepted and transcended by the  addressee,
who is a genuine speaker-hearer himself. Suppose that as  a  result  of  his
intention of being treated as a German the soldier had been so  treated.  He
certainly, though not Searle, would have counted  that  as  a  success,  for
that--not informing--was his intention. The point  concerning  which  Searle
is right--and I will deal with this below--is that  the  communication  that
obtains in this case cannot be considered paradigmatic, for it is  parasitic
on the use of the German language.

My comments:
1 - As a native speaker of English myself, I maintain that when  I  give  an
order my intention is to be obeyed, not to be understood (or my order to  be
known) in Searle's sense.  The  understanding  of  which  S  speaks  is  the
observer's  of  language  understanding,  not  the  understadning   of   the
participant in language.  Language doesn't  function  as  an  object  to  be
observed. Language is a very special kind of tool (not a tool that one  uses
but that one is), in that it means  practically  and  is  to  be  understood
practically. We learn first to speak and then to read. This order cannot  be
inverted. Yet the uderstanding  of  which  S  speaks  is  the  understanding
typical of reading, to which S wrongly reduces linguistic understanding.
2 - "Saying fits statements but not greetings." If by saying  we  understand
uttering a propositional content which can be understood in S's sense,  then
S is right. "Hello" is not something to be understood  as  "I  am  a  German
soldier is" [p. 44] (which involves predication and reference), for it  does
not involve predication and reference. But isn't "Hello" a linguistic  tool,
an expression of free recognition on the speaker's part of the addressee  as
his or her fellow-human being, which produces its intended  effect  when  it
is freely accepted as such by the addresse in the very act of  reciprocating
the salutation? Only a linguistic agent capable of saluting  is  capable  of
being saluted. One 'understands' salutation thr  first  time  one  'accepts'
being saluted and thereby becomes capable of saluting, much  aks  H.  Keller
became capable of referring rather than being signaled the  first  time  she
became capable of referring in her turn.
      S suggests that animals perform certain simple locutionary,  that  is,
communicative, acts:
"One can in certain special circumstances 'request'  someone  to  leave  the
room without employing any conventions, but unless one has  a  language  one
cannot request of someone that he... undertake a  research  project  on  the
problem of diagnosing... mononucleosis... Furtermore, I wish to argue,  some
system of rule governed elements is necessary for there to be certain  types
of speech acts, such as promising or asserting. My dog can  perform  certain
simple illocutionary acts. He can express pleasure and he can ask  (request)
that he be left out. But his range is very limited, and even for  the  types
he can perform, one feels it is partly  metaphorical  to  describe  them  as
illocutionaary acts at all" (pp. 38-39).
      The idea that this is "metaphorical," that this kind of  communication
is really not linguistic arises from  S's  realization  that  animals  don't
"say" what they intend  to  communicate.  In  Langer's  idolect,  they  just
"signal."  (And  the  recipient  doesn't  'understand,'  it  just   responds
automatically, acording to its inherited or acquired program).
      Think of "Kennst du das Land wo die Zitronen blühen"  (pp.  44).  "But
does it follow from this account  that when I say  'Kennst  du...,'  what  I
mean is 'I am a German soldier'? Not only does it not follow,  but  in  this
case I find myself disinclined to say that when I utter the German  sentence
what I mean is 'I am a German soldier...,' because what the words  mean  and
what I remember that they mean is 'Knowest thou...' Of  course,  I  want  my
captors to be deceived into thinking that what I mean  is  'I  am  a  German
soldier," but part of what is involved in that is  getting  them  to  thinnk
that that is what the words I utter mean in German... what we can  mean  is,
at least sometimes, a function of what we are saying. Meaning is  more  than
a  matter  of  intention,  it  is  also  at  least  sometimes  a  matter  of
convention" (pp. 43-44).
      There are two things involved here" "saying"  and  "illocutionary  and
perlocutionary".
       First,  concerning  saying.  Animals,  Searly  implies,   communicate
certain things but don't say. And because they don't  say,  their  range  of
communication is very reduced and their meaning probably metaphorical  only.
Certainly animals don't say, in the sense of referring  through  predicative
content. But what distinguishes them from us is, primarily, that they  don't
mean, that is, that  they  don't  have  communicative  intentions.  As  they
respond automatically, so they communicate automatically. In no way do  they
'choose' to communicate and communicate what  they  'choose.'  When  I  skay
'Hello' to you, I choose to salute you. It is a personal communication  from
me to youy. Same for 'I love you.' We  people  "stand  in  abeyance"  toward
what we will communicate, that is,  do  through  what  we  communicate.  Our
communications are not interjections, they are expressive of what we  choose
to communicate. What H. Keller discovered  was  how  to  stand  in  abeyance
toward things by naming them instead of just responding to  them,  and  that
there were others who stood  in  abyance  too,  and  that  as  these  others
referred her, so she could refer them.*
* There are degrees of distance, of standing in abeyance. Thus,  in  another
order, we distinguish manslaughter from murder from  deliberate  murder.  In
all there is a degree of  deliberation  and  choice,  or  of  culpable  lack
thereof because deliberation was possible. The same is the  case  concerning
the choice in communicating and in responding to  what  is  communicated  to
us.
        Of  course,  this  communication  has  regularities,  without  which
reference couldn't obtain. The names, for instance, are  constant,  as  well
as the verbs. Dictionaries  register  these  constants  in  words  for  each
language. And there is a constant syntactical structure. And so on. This  is
what S means by "rule-governed" and conventional. This is what he misses  in
the case of "Kennst du..." Now, since  S  separates  the  illocutionary  and
makes it primary and  selbständig  or  categorematic,  he  cannot  popssibly
consider this a case of linguistic communication, for what was said was  not
what was meant. But if the the perlocutionary intention is  primary,  if  it
patterns or gives shape to the illocutionary, which by  the  same  token  is
practically-illocutioinary to  be  transcended,  and  if  the  goals  to  be
achieved  depend partly on the circumstances, then  "Kennst  du"  was,  pace
Searle, a case of irregular but genuinely linguistic communication, for  the
intended was achieved linguistically though irregularly..
      With this I return to Searle's  illocutionary.  He  is  not  analyzing
what he and others do when they are actually engaged  in  communicating.  He
is so obsessed with the rule-governed character of language  that,  for  all
his talk of speech-acts, he begins with the already uttered, and  from  what
he understands through what is already said (about which he has  nothing  to
do, for he is not engaged in the communicative  situation)  he  induces  the
intentions  the  speaker  has  to  have.  His  model  is  therefore  written
language, which is always already said. And, as a  typical  philosopher,  he
ants to establish the truth about language kby making  statements  that  fit
the object-language.
