---
title: "98-Nov-2"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1998/98-Nov-2"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v2.3
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\statements Should become wp\98\nov-2 Nov. 18, 98

ON STATEMENTS AND STATEMENTS

“...tout cela... est une sequelle , ou simplement une manifestation, du philosophisme endémique dans l’Eglise depuis ses origines mais qui s’est installé à demeure dans la Scolastique depuis le XIIIe siècle . Pour un St Thomas et quelques autres, qui ont magnifiquement dévoré l’obstacle, et se sont même hissés et haussés sur lui, des centaines de ‘rationalistes’ de bas vol ont buté dessus” (E. Gilson to de Lubac, Mémoire sur l’occasion de mes écrits , Culture et Verité, Namur, 1989), p. 127. My emphasis).

On performative speech-acts

Explaining a particular aspect of the way in which language works, Searle invents the example of an American soldier during world war II, who encounters a group of German soldiers. The American knows no German, but he happens to remember from a course in German language he took years before a famous  verse from Goethe, “Ich komme von dem Land wo die Zitronen blühen,” and shouts it from afar to the Germans in the hope that they will take him for a German and not capture him.

The verse quoted by the American means “I come from the Land where the citrus-trees flourish,” not “I’m German.” Still, as Searle suggests, the American may entertain the hope, however slight, that the Germans will take him for a German because he said something in German, though he didn’t say “I am a German soldier.” Now, thought this is not the precise point of Searle’s example, it also illustrates another central point of Searle’s views on language, to wit: that aside from the essential effect common to all speech-acts, which is to communicate something to be understood, certain speech-acts also produce, and intend to produce, other effects which are not in themselves locutionary or linguistic. Thus, for instance, the essential linguistic effect of the speech-act “Pass me the book “ is to communicate that demand to the adressee, so that if the adressee understands that the speaker is asking him or her to pass him or her the book, the essential linguistic effect (which Searle calls the “illocutionary effect,”) is achieved, for any speech act is essentially something to be understood and achieves its linguistic effect if it is understood. In addition, however, the demand “Pass me the book” also intends the behavoral effect on the part of the addressee of passing the book to the speaker. Now, this effect, though achieved through linguistic means, is not itself strictly linguistic, for it does not consist in understanding, but physical or behavioral. Searle calls this non-linguisticeffect the “perlocutionary effect.”  

According to Searle, all speech-acts intend the illocutionary effect of being understood. And since, the illocutionary effect is the essential linguistic effect, a speech act that is understood as meant by the speaker is a successful linguistic act. In addition, however, certain speech-acts, such as “Pass me the book,” mean to produce the perlocutionary effect they express.

But whether or not the latter effect is actually achieved is linguistically accidental. In other words,

if I give you the order “Get out of this room,” and you understand the order I gave you, the speech-act is essentially successful as a linguistic act, even if you disobey my order, for speech-acts are essentially to be understood.  To summarize: all speech acts intend the illocutionary effect of being understood, and they are successful as speech-acts if they are so understood; in addition, certain speech-acts also intend to achieve an extralinguistic effect different from understanding. That, however, is not the case with all speech-acts, and as speech-acts they are successful as long as they are understood, whether or not the extralinguistic effect is achieved.

For my purposes, the important point is that speech-acts, in certain cases, aim at producing what Searle calls a perlocutionary effect, that is, an extralinguistic effect, and sometimes they succeed in producing such an effect. This relates to the example of the American soldier. Although this soldier most probably knew nothing of the theory of the perlocutionary effects of language, he nonetheless had enough experience as a user of language to realize that certain pieces of language do not only produce the effect of being understood  but also produce an extralinguistic effect. And what this soldier was banking on was that his saying “Ich komme von dem Land...” would produce on the part of the people whom he addressed the extralinguistic effect of their not paying special attention to him instead of making him a prisoner.

The idea that language may also be performative rather than merely meaningful, as it had traditionally been emphasized, that is, that language may intend to achieve and sometimes succeed in achieving effects that are not merely understanding of what is meant, that aside from conveying a meaning to be  understood language can perform other extralinguistic effects, is a prominent feature of Searle’s views on language, which he traces back to Austin (p. 30). Yet, oddly enough for someone who brings to the fore the performative character of language, in the particular case of statements Searle seems to me to miss completely the performative force they sometimes have.

In this Searle is far from being alone. Actually, his blindness to this aspect of statements seems to me to be both typical of the philosophical tradition as well as extremely significant philosophically, as I will explain later.   

Statements as performative speech acts

To characterize in at least a general way the sort of statements I want to deal with, I am talking about statements that refer to concrete objects in the world of our everyday experience, made by a speaker to a present addressee in concrete shared circumstances. I am not talking about explanatory statements of an object or an event, nor about statements that refer to other statements rather than to objects or events. For instance, all the statements I am making in this paper are explanatory of language, and they do not refer to concrete objects in the world of our everyday experience. By contrast, if in answer to a question of yours I tell you “The hammer is in the next room,” this is a statement of the kind I want to talk about.

Let me begin with this particular instance. If you tell me that you are looking for the hammer and  you ask me “Where is the hammer?” and I answer you “The hammer is in the next room,” I expect you to proceed to the next room to get the hammer. If you don’t do that, I’ll be surprised, and I’ll probably repeat my statement. If again you don’t proceed to the next room, I will suspect that you didn’t understand what I said. But suppose I ask you whether you understood what I said and you answer that you did understand, but still you don’t go to the next room and don’t give any explanation for your not going. Then I’ll ask you why you don’t go to the next room to get the hammer. Suppose you answer me, “Why should I go to the next room to get the hammer?” “Well, you told me that you were looking for the hammer, and I just told you that it is in the next room.” “I understand,” you say, “but why should I go to the next room to get the hammer?”

I could prolong this absurd example, but there is no point to doing that. Why indeed is this example absurd? Because the person looking for the hammer says that she understands my statement that the hammer is in the next room, and yet doesn’t go to the next room to get the hammer. And this is absurd, because she says that she understands my statement, but she really doesn’t. Indeed, in this case, unless there are reasons that explain her not going to the next room (such as “I don’t believe your statement,” or “I’m not in a hurry...) understanding the statement amounts concretely to going to the next room to get the hammer. This is why, in the absence of an explanation for her not going to the next room, I am convinced that she doesn’t understand.

But suppose that she tells me that she understands perfectly my statement, and to prove it she translates it into French, ” Le marteau est dans la pièce suivante, ” but still she doesn’t go to the next room to get the hammer, and she gives no explanation for her conduct, and she even confesses that she doesn’t see how her going to the next room or giving an explanation for not going are related to her understanding what I stated. Obviously, at least in my opinion, she doesn’t understand, no matter what she says and into how many languages she can correctly translate my statement. And I know that she doesn’t understand because it is constitutive of the   linguistic understanding of this statement in these circumstances for the addressee to go to the next room to get the hammer , unless the addressee has specific reasons for not going and  is prepared to explain his or her conduct by mentioning those reasons. This, indeed, is the way in which the statement “The hammer is in the next room” is meant to function under these circumstances, and this is the way in which any competent user of English would mean it as a speaker and the way in which it would and should be understood by the addressee. In other words, the speaker would mean his or her statement not as a piece of objective information about the world to be simply registered by the addressee, as Searle thinks statements function, but–in the context of the addressee’s goal as an agent–to motivate the addressee to go to the next room to get the hammer .

By the way, the same would be the case with the French statement “Le marteau est dans la pièce suivante,” for that is the way in which the kind of  statements I am talking about are meant and mean in all languages. They are made by an agent who addresses another agent or agents in a context of action, not of contemplation. They refer the addressee, to use my previous example, to the hammer in the next room not as object of contemplative understanding, as Searle thinks statements do, but to the hammer as object of practical desire. That is why the statement “The hammer is in the next room” is expected by the speaker to be attended on the addressee’s  part by  the action of going to fetch it in the next room.

In order to make sure that I am not speaking of exceptional cases but of the ordinary way in which statements function, let us consider a couple of other examples. If I am in the same room with you, and the telephone rings, and I take the phone and tell you “Your mother is on the phone,” I expect you to take the phone and talk to your mother. If, however, you do nothing of the kind, and offer no explanation for not taking the phone, and still claim that you understand what I said, I will maintain that you didn’t understand. The reason is, again, that in a context of action, in our everyday life, statements that refer to objects or events in the world inhabited by the speaker and addressee are meant to be understood performatively. In other words, if you really understand my statement, you perform the action of taking the phone, for that is what understanding performatively amounts to, and that is the way the statement is meant by the speaker. This is why, if you don’t perform the action of taking the phone and talking to your mother, I, the speaker, in the absence of a reason that explains why you didn’t take the phone, know that you didn’t understand, however strongly you may claim that you understand.  

Another example. I must have been about ten years old when one day, as I was waiting for my older brother at the door of the school which we both attended, I was told by another student that my brother had suffered a grave accident and had been taken to the hospital. What I was referred to linguistically by the statement was my brother being in a hospital after a serious accident. But the statement referred me to that not as object for contemplative understanding, but for performative understanding, that is, as something which was not an objective piece of information to be registered, but as something to be responded to in action. Anyway, my understanding actually was of that kind, for as soon as I heard the statement I ran home as fast as I could to tell my mother what had hapened. And when I, in my turn, stated to my mother what had happened, she herself didn’t register it as a piece of information to be contemplatively understood, but understood it performatively by running to the school in absolute anguish, which of course didn’t surprise me. What would have surprised me would have been if my mother had told me that she understood what I had said and had continued doing whatever she was doing at the time. Now, as it turned out in the particular case, the student who had told me about my brother’s accident had lied and just wanted to scare me. But I believed his statement, as of course he intended to, and he was not surprised of my reaction of running home rather than continuing to wait for my brother at the school’s door. Now, at the time of this event, I was a child, and nobody had explained to me that certain statements were meant to be understood performatively. However, as a competent user of language, I heard the student’s statement performatively, as it was meant to be heard, and my mother, too, heard my statement performatively, as I had meant it.

Searle’s conception of linguistic meaning

I mentioned before that I found it ironic that Searle, whose views on language take into account the performative aspect of language, completely misses the performative character of the kind of statements I am referring to. Searle could argue, however, that he missed nothing, for

I attribute to statements a perlocutionary force that they actually  do not have. Indeed, he could argue that all speech-acts that intend an effect other than meaning convey their perlocutionary force, when fully explicit, by virtue of their meaning. Thus, for instance, “Pass me the book” expresses by virtue of its meaning the speaker’s intention of having the book passed to him or her, which is the perlocutionary effect intended or meant by the speaker. However, Searle would observe that “Pass me the book” is not a fully explicit speech-act, in that its perlocutionary force is not fully expressed. Indeed, the action intended is explicitly meant, but whether it is intended as a result of a command, or of a simple request, or of begging, is not expressed.  Thus, when fully expressed, the perlocutionary force is different in the case of “I order you to pass me the book,” or “I reques t you to pass me the book ,” or “I beg you to pass me the book.” Thus, Searle would continue, if statements are meant to produce any other effect than their being understood, as I have suggested, their perlocutionary force, if they really had any, would show when their meaning is made fully explicit, for, as Searle claims, “whatever can be meant can be said.” But what is the action meant or intended by the speaker who states “Your mother is on the phone,” or “The hammer is in the next room”? Of course, the speaker could rather say “Talk to your mother on the phone,” or “Go to the next room and fetch the hammer,” if that is the speaker’s intention. But the meaning of the latter two speech acts, which are requests or commands, is not equivalent to the meaning of the former two speech-acts, which are statements. With this argument, therefore, Searle would feel vindicated in his view that statements are peculiar among speech-acts in that, by virtue of their grammatical meaning, they have no perlocutionary force . They simply and objectively state an object, an event, or a state of affairs to be as stated, and refer the addressee to that.

The basic charcteristic of language, according to Searle, is not simply that it is meaningful, but that it says or expresses in words what it means. Thus, for instance, a gesture of sending a kiss to someone may indicate love b ut is not a speech-act, for it doesn’t say what the speaker means  the way the speech-act “I love you” says it. For this very reason, to refer to the example cited above, Searle doesn’t consider a genuine speech-act the American soldier’s attempt to have the Germans believe that he is a German soldier by uttering “Ich komme von dem Land wo die Zitronen blüen,” even if it succeeded in achieving the American’s purpose of not being made a prisoner, because the words uttered don’t say at all what the American means, which is “I am a German soldier.” Language means by saying what the speaker means, and what is meant is what  is supposed to be understood by the addressee, for what is said, that is what is meant, is something to be understood. This explains why Searle views the actual achievement of perlocutionary effects linguistically accidental, for, to give a concrete example, the speech-act “I command you to pass me the book” is meant to convey the speaker’s intention to give that order, and therefore the speech-act is fully succcesful as a speech-act if only the addressee understands or comes to know that intention.

It is, then,  the core of Searle’s view of language that language is meaningful, that is, that all complete linguistic pieces or speech-acts convey a meaning by saying what is meant by the speaker, and that if they convey no meaning by expressing it in words they are not genuine linguistic acts. . Secondly, that linguistic meaning is something to be understood, and therefore that the necessary and sufficient condition for the success of the speech-act as such is that it be “understood” or “known” by the addressee. It is with this particular view of linguistic meaning as something to be understood or known that I disagree. In other words, I don’t think that the primary purpose of linguistic acts is to communicate something to be understood or known and, consequently, I don’t think that speech-acts succeed if only they are understood or, what is equivalent for Searle, if their meaning becomes known by the addressee.

Let me, for the monment,  ignore Searle’s view that statements have no perlocutionary force by virtue of their meaning. What I want to zero in on now is his view that the achievement of the perlocutionary effects, even when intended by the speaker, is linguistically accidental. My reason for disagreeing with Searle on this point is that, as a competent user of language–and this precisely is the basis on which Searle argues for his views– I find that the case is otherwise. Indeed, Searle claims that when I ask you “Pass me the book,” what I intend or mean is that you understand or be informed that I intend for you to pass me the book, not that you actually perform the action of passing me the book . Similarly, if I put a revolver on you and give you the order “Give me all the money you have on you,” what I supposedly  intend is that you understand or become informed of the intention I am communicating to you linguistically that you give me all the money you have on you, not that you actually give me the money. The latter, according to Searle,  is linguistically accidental; what is essential, linguistically, because that is the meanining I communicate linguistically through my command, is that you understand the speaker’s intention. For my part, as a competent user of language, I maintain that what the speaker in these two cases means by the words uttered is for the addressee to pass the book and to give the money to the speaker. And I maintain that if the addresse who is held up by the speaker tells the speaker that he or she understands the speaker’s words but doesn’t give the money to the speaker (the reason for this being that he or she interprets language after Searle’s view), not only will the addressee not make any sense to the speaker by saying that he understands what the speaker means, but he or she thereby places himself or herself in great danger of being killed by the speaker. After all, what the speaker wants is the money to be actually given to him or her, and that is what the speaker meant by saying “Give me all the money you have on you.” Wouldn’t the speaker and the addressee and any other competent speaker of language agree with me rather than with Searle on this point?

I suppose that Searle would rejoin that what I as a speaker, that is, as a linguistic agent, want is to communicate or make known to the addressee my intention of the book passed to me by him or her, for if the addressee doesn’t understand or gets linguistically informed of my intention she or he will not, and cannot, pass the book to me. But this is precisely the point on which I disagree with Searle. For him, the understanding by the addressee of the speaker’s intention renders fully successful the speech act as such, for that is what the speaker means to communicate. Hence, for Searle, such understanding may be a necessary condition for the action or perlocutionary effect to obtain, but the action itself is in no way constitutive of linguistic meaning; it is rather something totally different, additional to meanining and, ultimately, linguistically accidental. What I claim, by contrast, is that the actual action is itself part and parcel or constitutive of the linguistic meaning, so that if the action doesn’t obtain the speech-act fails as a speech act, even if the addresse understands or comes to know (in Searle’s sense) the speaker’s intention . My fundamental reason  for this claim is, again, that my intuition as a user of language is that, when I give an order, I intend for the addressee to obey my order, not merely to know that I gave that order. In short, the understanding I intend as a speaker on the addressee’s part is an understanding that is, so to say, incarnated in the addressee’s action of passing me the book. In other words, what I intend when I give an order is, not a speculative or theoretical understanding of my order that consists in sbeing informed of my order , but a practical or applicative understanding that consists in actually executing my order in obedience to it.

Now, can my view be supported by something more persuasive than just my authority as a competent speaker? I think so. Imagine that a young child heard all the orders given to her by her mother just as conveying the knowledge of the mother’s intentions but not as actually demanding the corresponding actions, so that the child would in no way feel obligated to obey by performing the actions commanded. Could we really say that this child understands what receiving an order, linguistically, amounts to? And could this child, if punished for her disobedience, understand that she is being punished and why, given that she supposedly did all she was supposed to do, namely, be informed of her mother’s linguistic intention? And could this child in her turn, when she becomes an adult, be capable of giving any commands, if she thinks like Searle that what she is doing when she commands something is not really demanding an action as an act of obedience but merely making known to the addressee her linguistic intention? And could she scold a child of hers  who tells her that he or she has been informed of her command but performs not the action commanded, given that this mother is herself convinced, as Searle supposedly is, that what she is doing when she gives an order is simply making known or understood her intention? In short, my argument against Searle is that if the actions commanded never followed the commands under the pretext that the actions themselves are linguistically accidental, no body would have ever learned to speak and hear what we speakers and hearers of language call language.  

I think I have sufficiently made my first point, to wit: that Searle’s conception of language, at least in the particular case of the meaning of perlocutionary acts, is simply wrongheaded. Even here, however, I have to be cautious and introduce a distinction that Searle himself doesn’t make. Indeed, under the category of perlocutionary acts Searle places indistinctly both those linguistic acts that demand an action from the addresseee–such as a command may demand the action of passing the book, and a begging may ask for the addressee’s action of graciously giving some money to the speaker–as well as  those linguistic acts that simply aim at producing an effect on the addressee without demanding any action on his or her part–such as saluting or insulting (or even PESUADING. BUT I’LL SPEAK OF PESUADING LATER ). The distinction between these two types of speech acts may be important, because perhaps Searle will be willing to concede that his interpretation of the perlocutionary speech acts of the first type is wrong, while still claiming that his interpretation of the speech acts of the second type is correct. Indeed, Searle might argue that when I salute somebody my speech act is fully succcesful if only the addressee understands or becomes in formed of my intention of saluting him or her. Now, I claim that even in the case of the perlocutionary acts of the second type Searle is wrong in reducing meaning to something to be “understood” or “known.”

Suppose that somebody saluted you and you didn’t see him or her, so that you don’t know that you were saluted. Searle, I think, would say that this proves that saluting is a speech act that intends the speaker’s intention of saluting the addressee to be known by the addressee, so that if such intention becomes understood or known by the addressee the speech-act is successful. Precisely because this didn’t obtain in the example I am considering, the speech-act failed as a speech-act of saluting. Saluting, therefore, as Searle contends, consists, on the speaker’s part, in making known his or her intention of saluting the addressee, and being saluted consists, on the addressee’s part, in coming to know the speaker’s intention of saluting. However, I beg to disagree. For if, in reference to the example I am considering where you failed to notice that you were saluted, I tell you that you were saluted by your friend who just passed on the other side of the street, I am making known to you that you were saluted, but you are not thereby being saluted, you are being informed, which is very different. Telling someone that she is being saluted is very different from saluting her; it intends to inform the addressee of a fact, not to produce on the addressee the effect of being saluted. Now, what is confusing or disconcerting here, is that when the spaker says “Hi” to the addressee, then, as Searle claims, he is saluting the addressee by the mere fact of saying “Hi,” and the addressee becomes saluted by the mere fact of understanding or coming to know the speaker’s intention of saluting him or her, which is exactly what the speaker intended to communicate by saying “Hi.” Still I beg to disagree with Searle. For my point is that when I salute somebody I say “Hi,” and do not say “I inform you of my intention of saluting you,” for what I intend is to constitute you as saluted, sop to say, not to inform you of any fact or to make any fact about my intentions known to you.

Perhaps my point concerning those perlocutionary speech-acts which intend no action on the addressee’s part but, rather, aim at producing an effect on the adressee, will become clearer if I present my own view by contrast to Searle’s. Searle thinks that what is going on in saluting is making known to the addressee the speaker’s intention of saluting the addressee, and that the addressee gets the message that he or she is saluted by understanding that intention. Now, what I think is that the speaker has the intention of saluting the addressee, not of informing the addresse of his or her intention of saluting; secondly, that the effect intended obtains, not by the addressee being informed of anything, since the speech act is not a statement of the speaker’s intention, but by the addressee getting the satisfaction exclusively produced by his or her being saluted by the salutator, which is precisely the effect intended by the salutator. much as the person who insults somebody by saying “you are a swine” intends to produce on the addressee the hurt exclusively characteristic of being insulted by the speaker, not to inform the addressee of the objective fact that the speaker has the intention of insulting him or her. Of course, if one is insulted, one knows that one is insulted; however, insulting is not making known anything, and one is not insulted by knowing anything.

Let me add some clarification concerning this subtle point. A kiss, in the case of human beings who are linguistic creatures and therefore live in the dimension of meaning(not in the case of animals, who are not linguistic) may in certain circumstances, or may not in other circumstances, incarnate a communicative intention of love, and thereby produce or not produce the characteristic effect of a loving kiss. Now, a loving kiss on the kisser’s part intends to produce on the kissed person the satisfaction characteristic of being kissisngly loved by the kisser, and the necessary and sufficient condition for this act to be successful is for the kissed one to experience the satisfaction uniquely characteristic of being kissingly loved by the kisser, which is what the kisser intends. Thus, if the person kissed doesn’t love the kisser and rejects his or her love, the kissed doesn’t experience the satisfaction of being kissingly loved by a loved kisser, and the effect intended by the kisser fails..

Of course, Searle would argue that a kiss is not a speech-act, for what is characteristic of linguistic acts is, according to him, that they say , that is, express in words, what they mean. Now, kissing doesn’t say what it means. My answer is that is quite true that kissing doesn’t say anything in the sense of sating or enunciating. But is it true that a certain kind of kiss doesn’t say anything in the sense of producing in the kissed person the satisfaction of being loved by the kisser, and that is sit not this what the kisser intends? In fact, is not a human kiss comparable to saluting, although of course saluting is not kissing? Indeed, contrary to Searle’s explanation, “Hi” is not a statement of one’s intention to salute. In this sense, “Hi” doesn’t say “I salute you.” In fact, it doesn’t say anything, and it doesn’t inform of anything/.  

But why does Searle begin with meaning conceived as mere understanding? Because Searle is a philosopher and, as such , he belongs in the philosophical tradition that, since the pre-Socratics and Socrates, has understood statements as expressing simply and objectively the object, or the event, or the state of affairs stated, and as referring the addressee or the hearer simply and objectively to the stated. Indeed, in the philosophical tradition by which Searle himself has been shaped, statements occupy a unique place, in that they are practically the only speech-act of professional interest to philosophers. And this is due, precisely, to the fact that statements are understood by philosophers to be the only speech acts that refers to what is the case objectively, and therefore the only speech act that can be true or false . A command may be silly or appropriate or cruel or whatever else, but it cannot be true or false. And the same is the case with all other speech acts, except statements. No wonder that philosophers, whose central interest is knowledge and truth, have concentrated their attention on statements to the exclusion of all other speech-acts. Though this is not strictly the case with Searle, for he explores other speech-acts and underscores their performative character due to their perlocutionary force,

he nonetheless reduces their perlocutionary force to a meaning to be understood objectively, that is, to be known–exactly as statements are supposed to be understood--and relegates the  actual achievement of the perlocutionary effects to a secondary and merely accidental place.

Searle’s position amounts to saying that when I give an order, what I as a speaker intend is for the person addressed to understand that I am giving such an order (because the essence of language is to be meaningful, and meaning is something to be understood ), and that as a speaker I don’t intend my order to be carried out, or that I intend that only secondarily and accidentally. This shows, in my opinion, though Searle supposedly accepts the performative character of language, he doesn’t take it seriously, and by not taking it seriously–again, in my opinion–Searle’s theory of language is wrongheaded. Indeed, I maintain, as a competent speaker of English–and this is Searle’s own basic criterion--that when I give an order what I intend linguistically is for my order to be obeyed and carried out by the addressee, not my order to be understood as to its grammatical meaning, as Searle implicitly supposes.   

speech-acts, as explicitly argued by Aristotle in the Peri Hermeneias , forcefully seconded by his medieval commentator Thomas Aquinas.  

But perhaps this shouldn’t be surprising.  After all, for Searle, the essential feature of language is that it is meaningful, and meaning is something to be merely understood.. This is what Searle calls the “illocutionary effect” of language. As for the performative capacity of language, that is, its capacity  to produce other affects aside from understanding of what is said (this is what Searle calls the “perlocutionary effects”), it is not essential, since it is not intended in all speech-acts and since anyway the meaning to be understood is independent of whether or not such effects are intended or achieved.

No wonder, then, that Searle , who is interested only  in the meaning of speech acts, and is interested in the perlocutionary force of speech-acts only insofar as it is meant, that is, insofar as it is to be understood, for he deems linguistically irrelevant the actual achievement or lack thereof of the perlocutionary effect, missed the performative character of statements.

I have no quarrel with that. My disagreemnt concerns Searle’s conception of meaning.  For Searle, meaning is something to be “understood” or “known” –he uses the two words equivalently. From this it follows–and it is a consequence explicitly drawn by Searle--that for a speech-act to be successful as a speech-act it is both necessary and sufficient that what is meant by the speaker be understood or known by the addressee, regardless of whether or not  any perlocutionary effects are actually achieved, if and when intended.  This is why, for Searle, the performative character of language, that is, the intention of a perlocutionary effect, is not necessarily found in all speech-acts. This is why a speech act can convey a meaning even when no perlocutionary effect is intended, as is the case with statements. And this is also why the actual achievement or lack thereof of the perlocutionary effects, when they are intended, is irrelevant or merely accidental from the linguistic point of view.

Now, why does Searle maintain what he maintains? Because of his view of language. Language is meaningful, that is, expresses and communicates meaning, and meaning is something to be understood or known. Something to be understood is what any competent speaker mens to communicate, and that is what any competent hearer grasps when the speaker’s intention becomes known to him or her through understanding. Where exactly do I disagree with Searle?
