---
title: "98-truth"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1998/98-truth.wpd"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v2.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\98\sept-1

                                                   

THE QUESTION OF TRUTH

The idea of truth as correspondence or adaequatio is connected with

the visual experience, be it the experience of seeing somebody else in the act of seeing or touching or hearing, or the visual experience of seeing a written statement which expresses a judgment.

For the former , take the case of animals, which do not state what they know. Yet,  according to Aristotle, they know materially, in that what they see (or expect?) is adequate to what is the case, but they don’t know formally, in that they don’t know that they know. Now, for Aristotle the epistemologist to affirm that an animal knows he has to hypothesize that what the animal sees is what he himself sees, for animals don’t say what they see.

For the latter , take the case of Aris himself, who, by contrast to the animal, doesn’t only see what is the case, but he knows that what he sees is the case (though in the case of perception not apodictically or with necessity).  In other words, Aris knows formally, because knowledge is knowledge of the truth of one’s knowledge, that is, knowledge as knowledge is reflective.

The point here is that the very notion of knowledge as conformity or as similarity is inspired by the visual metaphor. Indeed, vision is dualistic in that it takes place at a distance between the seeer and the seen, and at the same time presupposes conformity between what the seeer sees and the reality seen,  in order to be true. (Aris attempts to erase the duality by conceiving of knowledge as intentional identity between the knower and the known, but the duality remains, in that the knower ‘s knowledge remains ontologically different from the reality known and is only intentionally identical with it).

To have a complete idea of Aris’s notion of knowledge, however, we have to consider another or his tenets, to wit: that truth is a property of judgments, and of their linguistic expression in statements, exclusively . In other words, only judgments and statements, according to Aristotle, can be true or false. Here the contrast is not with perceptual acts, which can be materially true if only they correspond or conform to the reality perceived, but  with simplex apprehensio which can be neither true nor false, even if and when it corresponds or conforms. Why does Aris deny that simplex apprehensio can be true or false?  As indicated by its name, apprehension grasps what is the case, much as the perception of animals does grasp intentionally what is the case when it is correct, when it is materially true. Yet Aris doesn’t say that simplex apprehensio is true, not even materially ^(F1). Why not? Because, by contrast to judgment, in simply apprehending something, the knower is in no way committed to its conformity to reality. This apprehension, insofar as the grasp of what is the case is concerned, is purely potential, as far as the knower is concerned. Only when the knower commits himelf or herself to the apprehension being conform to what is the case does the knower genuinely know. Whether affirmative or negative, the judgment, like the statement by which it is expressed, is categorically predicative. Whereas the simplex apprehensio is snot. Oonly those acts which involve or express the commitment of the knowing subject to the identity between what is known and what is the case can be true or false, and those acts are judgments and their verbal expression, namely, statements.

This seems to imply that knowledge and truth are somewhat different things for Aristotle. Knowledge consists in conformity or adequatio or intentional similitude (see Lonergan, Verbum, p. 168). Truth consists in commitment to the conformity thanks to the grasp of sufficient reason for affirming or denying that the case is such. When the mind grasps sufficient reason it denies or affirms, and when it grasps sufficient reason with necessity it necessarily affirms or denies. Conformity without grasp of sufficient reason and, therefore, without theoretical commitment to the case being such, which arises out of the grasp of sufficient reason, is material knowledge. Conformity with grasp of sufficient reason is formal knowledge. Conformity with grasp of essentially or causally necessary or apodictic reason is scientific knowledge or episteme.

The above has not included in any way what Aris calls practical knowledge. Insofar as Aris calls it knowledge, the implication seems to be that it, too, consists in conformity or similitude. Since it is practical knowledge, however, it is connected with action. One way of construing this connection, suggested by Aristotle himself, is that speculative knowledge is guided by the sheer, disinterested desire to know, whereas practical knowledge is guided by other desires. In this interpretation, the object known in the case of speculative and practical knowledge may be the same, except that speculative knowledge is satisfied with the knowledge itself, whereas practical knowledge will move beyond mere knowledge to action. Thus, in Aris’ s own illustration, one can study medicine for the sake of acquiring medical knowledge, or for the sake of curing. [ Another aspect of practical knowledge, indicated by the case of medical knowledge, is that it is at least in part based on practical repeated experience of effects, which in animals produces practical expectation concerning the future and in people leads to the grasp of the general rule.] A second way of construing the connection between knowledge and action in the case of practical knowledge, suggested too by Aris himself in relation to the practical syllogism, though not clearly spelled out, is that affective desire (not the purely objective desire to know) is intrinsic to practical knowledge so as to make it totally different from speculative knowledge. In this interpretation, speculative knowledge aims at, and consists in, conformity to what is the case  and the assent or commitment of the mind to what is the case. Practical knowledge, by contrast, aims at, and consists in, not conformity or commitment to what is the case but appropriate action.

The difference between these two ways of construing the connection between knowledge and action is the following. In the former case, speculative knowledge is a necessary though not sufficient condition  for practical knowledge. The desire to see my friend Patroclos guides my search for his whereabouts, and I discover that he is in Athens. Somebody else who is not particularly desirous of seeing Patroclos may discover that he is in Athens. Our knowledge is the same. However, since I want to see Patroclos, my knowledge that he is in Athens will demand a further step, namely, action--that is, to go to Athens if at all possible--, whereas the other guy’s knowledge will terminate in mere assent. In the latter interpretation speculative and practical knowledge have nothing in common and the former is not a necessary condition for the latter. Speculative knowledge is inspired by the objective or disinterested desire to know. Furthermore, it consists in conformity and terminates in assentful grasp of conformity with what is the case.  Practical knowledge, by contrast, is inspired or guided by interested desire. Furhtermore, it aims at bringing about a not yet existent state of affairs desired as a means to achieve the subject’s goal, and it consists in the actual achievement of the goal.

I think that Plato–or at least Socrates, with his obsession with essential definitions, of piety for instance–definitely favored the first interpretation to the positive exclusion of the second. Aris is more ambiguous. He wavers between the two, without ever clearly formulating the second, but approaching it, particularly when he speaks of the practical syllogism which is irreducible to the speculative one. Nonetheless, he never escaped Plato’s speculativism.

Be that as it may, one wonders why the temptation to reduce speculative to practical knowledge, or at least to subordinate practical to speculative knowledge, has been, historically, so strong, which is in my opinion a scandalous case of putting the cart before the horse. Indeed, I think that if subordination there is, it is the other way around. Moreover, I think that even speaking of subordination of speculative to practical knowledge is a mistake, for all genuine knowledge is practical.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

^(F1) Simplex apprehensio is of the reflective, intellectual order. It involves reflection into phantasm and is reached through abstraction. Thus, animals don’t partake in that, since they are incapable of abstracting and reflecting and they lack understanding. Now, if simplex apprehensio, though cognitional, is not knowledge, shouldn’t Aris say, by the same token, that the perception of people and animals is not true even materially? Indeed , though it may be materially conform to what is the case, it involves no commitment on the animal’s part to the case being or not being such. Yet Aris says that animals know materially, though not formally. Doesn’t this indicate that Aris is thinking of the animal’s commitment as revealed through the action that follows the perception? But such commitment through desirous perception is very different from the theoretical commitment to the truth of a statement, which is not followed by action but by mere assent and, when doubted, by demonstration of the case being such as stated. In fact, practical knowledge involves no similarity to what is the case, for it is not about what is the case.
