# FAITH AND PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY

It seems to be a fact that, whereas everyone takes for granted that it is impossible to formulate "Catholic mathematics" or "Catholic chemistry" or "Catholic history" or "Catholic sociology", a still strong current of Catholic opinion thinks that a Catholic philosopher should develop and teach "Catholic philosophy". That this last expression has had and still has a historical meaning is undeniable. That, on the other hand, there exists between Faith and Philosophy a particular relationship that is not to be found between Faith and any other scientific discipline, seems undebatable, too. But being convinced, for my part, that the name of "Catholic philosophy" and the relationship between Faith and philosophy have been used and abused as weapons against the scientific and academic freedom of those philosophers who are Catholics, I think it is worthwhile to devote a few considerations to this problem.

## An idea of philosophy

Philosophy, at least as this term is usually understood in our Western civilization, was born in the Greek world, a few centuries before Christ, as a rational effort of man to understand himself and his environment. It would be a ridiculous contention to claim that the Greeks were the first to be interested in understanding their destiny and the universe they lived in. What really characterized the birth of philosophy was a new point of view: while other cultures had had recourse to faith, or theological explanations of man and nature, it was in Greece that man felt it endeavored to reach a purely rational explanation of them. It was a radical attitude that consisted in making human reason, as distinguished from the authority of tradition and from the authority of religion, the point of departure of human research. It was not a denial of faith, but an affirmation of reason.

Originally a philosopher was just "a man of the methods", that is, a man whose point of departure was not faith but reason, a man who looked for knowledge conquered by human intelligence, whether the field of his main interest was the composition of the earth, the nature of the stars, the diverse of mathematics, the laws that governed human society, or the mysterious origin and destiny of man. The distinction between the different scientific disciplines was not an automatic achievement, but the result of a long process. As a matter of fact, this process is still going on today. Have we not seen in the last century the birth of a number of new disciplines, both in the field of natural sciences and in the field of social sciences?

In this process of differentiation, the name of philosophy was finally relegated to a particular science committed to the study of a few of the most fundamental and excruciating human problems which seem inaccessible to those of any other science and in whose solution the methods of any other science are inapplicable. Whether philosophy can by itself reach any solution for the problems it is devoted to is perhaps questionable. What is out of the question is that philosophy was born, together with the other sciences, long before the Catholic Church existed, as part of the same effort of reaching a rational explanation of man and his universe. And as the birth of the Catholic Church did not modify the nature of that effort nor of any of the particular sciences, it did not modify the nature of philosophy.

In my view, the failure of many Catholics to realize that philosophy is just a particular and limited aspect of man's scientific effort, in exactly the same sense as any other scientific discipline, is the main cause of the special treatment it has received from the part of the Church. While other sciences, more or less painfully, have achieved their independence from theology, philosophy has been maintained in a special limbo of its own and is still considered as the servant of theology. The philosopher who is a Catholic is still being conceived of as the one who, because of his Faith, formulates Catholic philosophy. Does this imply that the philosopher has to accept in his science an heterogeneous criterion of Faith? But in the very moment philosophy accepted such a criterion it would cease being philosophy, much in the same way as physics would cease being the science we know with that name at the moment it accepted an un-scientific criterion. "Un-Scientific" means not false, but extraneous to science. And, if as it is usually said, this criterion of Faith imposed on philosophy is purely negative, why is it that it is not imposed on physics or on mathematics and that no one speaks about "Catholic physics" or "Catholic mathematics"?

## Catholic Philosophy

Clearly, the answer to our questions lies in the different relationship between both the fields of mathematics and physics and the field of philosophy to the level of Faith. To put it in a few words, while Christian Revelation does not offer any clue nor any answer to the problems of mathematics or physics, it offers an answer of Faith to a few of the most important questions of philosophy. Accordingly, while the Church as the interpreter of Revelation has nothing whatever to do with the questions of the mathematician, it has something to do with those of the philosopher. Now, while my intention is not, as I expressed it in the first lines of this article, to deny this special relationship between Faith and philosophy, I think that the sense and the consequences of this relationship have often been misunderstood and exaggerated by many Catholics.

The Church founded by Christ was certainly not a society of philosophical research, but a structured, hierarchical community of faithful. Consequently, the power of Magisterium granted by Christ was not a power to formulate philosophy, but to authoritatively interpret, declare and teach the living Revelation that in Him had found its full accomplishment. From this it follows that in those cases in which the infallible declaration of the Church happens to give an answer to one or other of the philosophical questions of man, this answer is not a philosophical one (an answer to a problem is philosophical when it has been reached through a purely rational effort). It is clear that the answers offered by Revelation are true but non-philosophical, but, of course, of Faith.

These obvious considerations enable us to explain what can possibly be meant by the expression "Catholic philosophy".

It is evident that a person may claim to have a Catholic philosophy in the very large sense of a Catholic view of things (Weltanschauung). But it is equally evident that this view is not a philosophical one, in the strict sense of the word, since it is based on Revelation and, therefore, is not the result of purely rational inquiry. What we deny is not the validity of this so-called "philosophy", but that it is philosophy in the strict sense of the word. And here we are exclusively concerned with philosophy in this latter sense.

What is more often meant by "Catholic philosophy" is a system of strictly philosophical research whose solution to those philosophical problems to which Revelation has brought an answer coincide with those answers as they have been authoritatively declared by the Church. And as Saint Thomas is considered as the main architect of that system, "Catholic philosophy" and "Thomism" are usually taken as synonyms. Now, in this case I do not deny that Thomism is a philosophy in the strict sense of the term, but I deny that it can be called "Catholic" in a really meaningful sense. For whatever the value of the Thomistic philosophical system, this value is not to be determined by the fact that it is "Catholic," but by its philosophical consistency. That is, the fact that the Thomistic system gives to some or even to many philosophical questions the same answer authoritatively declared by the Church is, from the philosophical point of view, absolutely irrelevant. But if such is the case, what is the use of calling it "Catholic"? Either it is the only valid and ultimate philosophical system, or it is not. If valid, it is valid for all men, not only for Catholics. If not valid, the fact that it is called "Catholic" does not improve it nor should make it more acceptable to any Catholic. Of course, we know that there are Catholics that view the Thomistic system precisely as the only valid and ultimate one. And, while we respect their freedom to voice their opinion, we fail to grasp the grounds on which they tend to make their opinion mandatory for every Catholic. If they appeal to the authority of the Church, we feel entitled to ask what is the authority of the Church, in purely scientific matters, to declare that the answers of a philosophical system or on are not in agreement with her own teachings; but, as the Church is not a society of philosophical research and as it has received no gift to judge on every philosophical matter, no one can appeal to the philosophical judgment of the Church to consecrate a philosophical system. And if the reason alleged by the devotees of Thomism to impose that system is its philosophical value, then the evident fact that most of the philosophers of the present day do not accept Thomism as the ultimate word on philosophy is sufficient to accord them the right of continuing their scientific research and to grant to every Catholic the right of contributing to that scientific research. But if a philosopher who is a Catholic has the right to reject the so-called "Catholic philosophy", one can hardly see in what sense that philosophy would be more "Catholic" than any other.

If it all were simply a matter of names, I would not mind at all Thomism's being called "Catholic philosophy". But it happens that in this case the name has historically been used as an argument against every philosopher who, being a Catholic, is unsatisfied with Thomism and conducts his research in an independent way. And it is against this abuse I protest as a Catholic and as a philosopher.

A few apparently more liberal-minded Catholics who are not insensitive to these arguments against Thomism feel ready to extend the name of "Catholic philosophy" not only to Thomism, but to every philosophical research or system whose final conclusions are in agreement with the teachings of the Church. In other words, a philosopher who is a Catholic should conduct his research in such a way that he infallibly arrives at the answer or answers he previously knows through his Faith, or else. Unfortunately, no philosopher who honestly works on a problem has any recipe to find a predetermined solution and, on the other hand, he has neither the right nor even the possibility of distorting his research in order to make it agreeable or acceptable to Catholics. So, to develop a "Catholic philosophy", even in this more "liberal" sense, is impossible.

For this difficulty a "ready-made solution" is often offered. Do your philosophical research; if you have the chance of coming to the "Catholic conclusion", you "did it", you are a "Catholic philosopher", and you have the right to publish your research and to teach it; otherwise you had better keep quiet and forget your research, for your Faith is in danger, your loyalty to the Church is seriously undermined, and you should not endanger the Faith of other people with your strange and shallow theories.

The only fault with this solution is that it is not a solution at all. As a matter of fact, it presupposes that what is really important in philosophical research is only the final conclusion, not the research itself. But if such were the case, in those questions to which divine Revelation has already given a final, unphilosophical answer, every attempt to reach a purely philosophical solution would be absurd on the part of a Catholic. Not apart from the fact that this of Thomism and that it would exclude Catholics from the study of some of the most important aspects of the most fundamental problems of man, the assumption on which this ready-made solution lies is wrong. For in philosophy, as in every other science, the conclusion one reaches is not a unity with that process. It is not the same to guess or even to affirm categorically the existence of the proton, and to be able to establish it scientifically. And even if one were able to affirm that he knew the existence of the proton through divine revelation, a scientist would not consider the existence of the proton as scientifically established. In other words, an affirmation is not scientific because it is true, but because it has been reached through scientific inquiry and seems to be scientifically undeniable at least for the time being. But philosophy being just another aspect of the scientific effort, the same has to be said of the field of philosophy.

In conclusion, the fault with every attempt to give a religion to philosophy is and has always been: just one of the multiple aspects of the scientific effort of man to understand himself and his environment. That is why every effort to make philosophy depend on theology is bound to destroy philosophy without even presenting the advantage of aiding the Catholic Faith. For neither is the Catholic Faith in allegiance to Christ grounded on the strength of the arguments of reason, nor is philosophy a factory of arguments of reason which will make easier an allegiance to Christ that does not depend on them.

## Faith and Reason

Here we touch an emotionally charged question: the relationship between Faith and reason. And, as in the case of "Catholic philosophy" we found fault with a reduction of philosophy to the condition of servant of theology, here we are bound to find fault with a certain latent conception of Faith that would make it seem the result of a pure rational process. For one cannot make the fate of philosophy dependent on Faith without, by the same token, making the fate of Faith dependent on philosophy.

I think I can sum up the doctrine of the Church on the relationship between Faith and reason, or at least that part of the Catholic doctrine which directly concerns our present problem, in the three following propositions: 1. Faith is not the result of a rational process, but a gift of God, unattainable by man left to his own efforts. 2. However, those truths of the Faith which do not constitute what are properly called "mysteries" can be attained by man's pure rational effort. 3. Particularly in this latter case, there is no place for a conflict between Faith and reason, in the sense that there cannot be two different truths about exactly the same object; so, whatever human reason comes to a conclusion that contradicts the truth of Faith, human reason is wrong.

Let us start with the second proposition. Actually, it rarely establishes the existence of a field that is common to Faith and reason. It is because such a common field exists that there is between Faith and philosophy the special relationship we studied above. Therefore, it seems that this proposition needs

More complex is the case of the third proposition. On one hand, it seems to imply that there cannot be any conflict between Faith and reason. On the other hand, it suggests that, in case of a conflict, reason is on the side of Faith, not of reason. I hope that my formulation of the doctrine of the Church is sufficiently clear as to indicate that the conflict is possible only in the sense that man, using the limited intelligence with which God has endowed him, can come to conclusions that seem inescapable and that contradict a truth of Faith, out not in the sense that the conclusions that contradict a truth of Faith are true. In other words, while a "psychological conflict" is always possible, because a person may face a choice between what his reason grasps and what his Faith demands him to believe, an "objective conflict" between Faith and reason is impossible, because there are not two different truths about exactly the same object: one truth for man as a believer, and a different one for the same man as an intelligent being.

Still it is very important to grasp that the impossibility of an "objective conflict" does not exclude the possibility of a "psychological conflict". In fact, this latter conflict is so possible that hardly an honest Catholic of average intelligence can claim that he has never faced such is piously called a "temptation against Faith". What are these "temptations" but "reasons" against a particular aspect of Faith? Now, whatever the objective strength of those reasons, they seem to be sufficiently cogent as to demand from the part of the Catholic an effort to overcome them through Faith, an effort to renew his unconditional allegiance to Christ in the Church in spite of those reasons. Of course, it would be sound advice for that Catholic to consult a well-informed priest, or to read a few intelligent books in order to find other "reasons" against his "reasons". But no one would say that our Catholic may suspend his allegiance to Christ and his commitment to Faith in the meanwhile. Therefore, he has, at least for the moment, to overcome his reason through Faith. And what if our Catholic is unconvinced by the arguments of the priest he consults or of the books he reads? If his Faith is grounded on the strength of purely rational arguments as to depend upon them completely, by his total logically abandon Faith. But, as was expressed in the first proposition on the relationship between Faith and reason, Faith is not the result of a rational process and is not based on the cogency of rational arguments; it is a gift from God. A Catholic who has understood this certainly does not look for reasons against his Faith, but he is not afraid of facing them honestly.

If we have insisted on this apparently unimportant example, it is because of its clear analogy with what happens in the case of the philosopher. Having an intelligence as limited as every other human being, the philosopher can be wrong in the final conclusions of his research, exactly in the same way as every other scientist can be wrong in his. The same, of course, is true of the philosopher who is a Catholic, for his religion constitutes no guarantee against scientific error. But as it does not constitute any guarantee against scientific error, neither should it prevent him from philosophical research.

Certainly, in case of conflict between the results of his research and his Faith, the philosopher has to go beyond his reason in order to maintain his allegiance to Christ in the Church. But that is the price of Faith not only for the philosopher, but for every Catholic of average intelligence and slightly intellectual interests. I do not claim that the position of the Catholic philosopher, or of the Catholic scientist or of the Catholic student is particularly comfortable. But Christianity has never been, as far as I know, a life-plan for comfort.

Now, in order to avoid this agonizing effort that is part of our Faith, an easy way seems to be open: to create a "Catholic philosophy" that would suppress even the possibility of the psychological conflict. It is clear that if one is afraid of a Faith that is not the result of a rational process, if one is afraid of candidly admitting to the non-believer that one does not have any philosophical reason to defend a particular point of his Faith, a "Catholic philosophy" is for that person a psychological necessity. But by renouncing one's Faith so dependent on a philosophy one might be endangering the very Faith he is trying to overprotect, for he might come to discover that the philosophical value of his "Catholic philosophy" is not as strong as he used to imagine, and in that case his Faith might fall to pieces with his philosophy.

In fact, that seems to have been the case for many a Catholic student in the university level. But who is at fault: the philosopher, the biologist, or the physicist who all honestly criticized the value of the "rational" arguments on which the student had unconsciously grounded his Faith, or of those naive people who unconsciously conditioned the student to think that his Faith was grounded on those rational arguments? Of course, one may always tie a particular philosophical system to his faith and call it "Catholic philosophy", but he cannot do it without making the fate of his faith dependent on the fate of that system. So, in case of disaster, put the blame where it belongs.

## Philosophy in the University

One of the strongest arguments of many Catholics against academic freedom in philosophy can be summarized in the following manner: if the University is the place where the student goes to learn truth, how can a philosopher who is a Catholic teach anything diverging from the implications which he knows through his Faith?

The error in this case is that, shocking as it may sound to a naive reader, the University is not the place where the student goes to learn truth, but the place he goes to become informed of, and to participate in, scientific research for truth. This is not a modern idea of the University, but just the result of an obvious reflection on the history of that institution. I suppose that no one will try to defend the idea that the medicine, or physics, or chemistry taught in the medieval universities was "the truth". And to speak about a more recent experience, the Newtonian physics taught in the most advanced universities less than a century ago differed considerably from the Einsteinian physics that is being taught nowadays even in the most conservative universities. Now, if the students of a century ago imagined that they were learning "the truth" in physics, they were wrong, just as we might be wrong today if we considered the Einsteinian Physics as the final word in that field. Thus, if there are still students who think of the university as the place where one goes "to possess the truth," they are mistaken, for the University has never been such a place. What the University has always been and will, in all probability, always remain is a scholarly community of teachers and students bound together by a common passion for scientific research for truth. Nothing more and nothing less.

Once this is understood, either one accepts the idea that the fate of the scientific discipline called philosophy cannot be different from that of all other scientific disciplines, for progressive research is the only way man has yet found to advance towards scientifically conquered truth, or one makes philosophy a matter of Faith and one is no longer in the scientific discipline called philosophy. But if every other discipline progresses through an indefinite number of trials and errors why shouldn't philosophy? And if the philosopher who is a Catholic does not have the right to present the results of his research freely and honestly, how is he to contribute to the advancement of philosophy? As every kind of scientific research, it is the failures that make the breakthrough possible. Even if Newton had known the shortcomings of his views, to or send those views would have remained scientifically necessary, for an Einstein was possible only because a Newton had existed and worked before him. So the fact that a philosopher who is a Catholic knows through his Faith a few or even many shortcomings of his research is no reason to prevent him from presenting such research to the criticism of the scholarly community. I eagerly admit that this will not make the Faith of Catholics easier, but I do not think that the task of philosophy is to make easier a Faith that is not grounded on philosophy, nor do I think, for that matter, that the Catholic student has anything to learn from the perpetuation of a distorted idea of philosophy and of the University. Just as the University is not the place where the student goes to "possess the truth", neither is it the place the teacher goes to present his views authoritatively or to defend them dogmatically. It is perhaps because the Catholic Church rightly teaches in an authoritative way and defends her teachings in a dogmatic manner, that the Catholic student—and, in general, many Catholics—mistakenly expects the same from the Catholic who teaches philosophy. But the fact is that the authority of a scientific view alone is its own scientific coherency and consistency. Either it defends itself, or it is undefendable. In a university, there is no place for any authoritative teaching, nor for any dogmatic defense of a teaching. Thus, if the Catholic student is perhaps more vulnerable than other students to the personal authority of his teachers in the University and more prone to listen to them as if they were proffering articles of Faith, this is not the fault of the University but again of the people who have unconsciously perpetuated a wrong idea of what the University is and of what teaching in a University is. For my part, I think that to contribute to the clarification of these issues will do more for the Faith of the students than all prejudices against a well-understood and responsible academic freedom.

---

*Xavier O. Monasterio*
*University of Dayton*
