---
title: "97-JAN-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1997/97-JAN-1.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


      ON ARCHBISHOP ROMERO AND SOME ASPECTS OF AUTONOMY
                                             Xavier O. Monasterio
      I committed myself to write a paper on autonomy in relation  to  Latin
America, in particular to the situation that prevailed  in  El  Salvador  at
the time of Oscar Romero's tenure  as  archbishop  of  the  capital  of  his
country. As a native Latin American and as a Christian,  I  eagerly  availed
myself of this  opportunity  to  reflect  on  archbishop  Romero  himself--a
historical figure for whom I had much admiration. I  must  confess,  though,
that I found myself hampered by the constraint I  had  accepted  of  viewing
Romero precisely  in  order  to  make  explicit  certain  aspects  of  human
autonomy. I hope that this constraint, in the version of  it  I  adopted  in
taking Jean-Paul Sartre's conception of autonomy as my  foil,  will  neither
distort archbishop Romero's extraordinary character nor prevent the  readers
of this article from paying to him the attention he deserves.
      As for my choice of foil, it was dictated in the first  place  by  the
fact that few thinkers, if any, in our  times,  have  been  more  articulate
about autonomy or attributed a more  central  place  to  it  than  Jean-Paul
Sartre in his early writings. Indeed, he doesn't see in autonomy  one  trait
among others  of  the  human  being,  to  be  integrated  with  other  human
characteristics. Rather, he equates the human  being  with  autonomy.  Being
human is, in  his  view,  identical  with  being  autonomous.  Autonomy  and
humanness are simply coextensive, for the human  being  is  the  being  who,
unlike all  others,  chooses  his  or  her  own  conduct  and  is  therefore
responsible for what he or she makes of himself or herself.
      An additional reason for my selection of  Sartre  was  my  conviction,
based in long years of  teaching,  that  with  their  tradition  of  "rugged
individualism" Americans are culturally inclined  to  conceive  autonomy  in
somewhat Sartrean terms. As I find, for my part, the  early  Sartre's  views
deeply flawed, I thought  that  the  contrast  with  the  kind  of  autonomy
exemplified by Romero could be particularly provocative and enlightening.
Christian autonomy
      When Oscar Arnulfo Romero y Galdamez took possession as archbishop  of
San Salvador, on February 22, 1977, he was  fifty-nine  years  old.  In  the
smallest country of the American continent, where  half  of  the  population
lived on less than 10 dollars a month, where only 16% of the work force  had
full employment, where half of 1% of the landowners owned 38% of the  arable
land, where all efforts to bring democracy  about  had  been  systematically
stifled, and where the government  and  the  army  were  for  all  practical
purposes owned by the small group of the affluent supported  militarily  and
economically  by  the  United  States  in  pursuance  of  its   geopolitical
interests, Romero had had a rather distinguished ecclesiastical career.[1]
      He was ordained priest in 1942. Then he was sent  to  Rome,  where  he
obtained a licence in theology  at  the  prestigious  Gregorian  University.
After that, in succession, he was parish priest, director  of  a  provincial
seminary, rector of the interdiocesan seminary  in  the  capital,  auxiliary
bishop of San Salvador, bishop of the diocese  of  Santiago  de  María,  and
finally archbishop of San Salvador for three short years, since February  of
1977.
      Understandably, this is the point at which the film "Romero," which  I
will often take as a convenient point of reference, enters Romero's  career.
After all, not only is this the moment  at  which  the  dramatic  historical
events in which Romero participated  and  for  which  he  became  famous  or
notorious (depending on one's outlook) began, but it also is the  moment  at
which what many have seen as the mystery of Romero begins. How--it has  been
asked again and again--could this until then profoundly spiritual member  of
the hierarchy of the Catholic Church become overnight a political  activist,
intensely partisan, even (some  suggest)  crypto-communist  archbishop?  Had
Romero been a hypocrite until then? Or was he a man of  weak  character  who
fell victim to the influence of the very extremist members of the clergy  he
himself had  previously  criticized?  Or  did  he  perhaps  become  mentally
unbalanced under the pressures  of  the  events  in  his  position  of  high
ecclesiastical responsibility?
      That there was a change in Romero when he  became  archbishop  of  the
capital is undeniable. However, what the questions I  just  cited  imply  is
that there was a radical rupture in his personality. In  other  words,  from
having been a pastor who believed that the mission of the  Church  as  such,
and in particular of the members  of  the  clergy,  was  to  attend  to  the
spiritual needs of people, leaving to others the concern for the  things  of
this world, except for works of charity, suddenly on  the  occasion  of  his
nomination to the siege of San Salvador, either  by  instantaneous  personal
decision or under the influence of extreme leftists  among  his  clergy,  he
became the very opposite.
      This impression may have unintentionally been reinforced by  the  film
"Romero,"  partly  because  while  it  correctly  suggests   that   Romero's
nomination to San Salvador was welcomed  by  the  conservatives  it  doesn't
deal with  Romero's  history  before  he  became  archbishop;  partly,  too,
because the film packs in rapid succession events that  took  place  in  the
course of three years. The  real  Romero,  however,  can  only  emerge  when
replaced in the context of his earlier pastoral activity and of the  changed
situation that his nomination brought about.
      One important element of the situation has to be  taken  into  account
in the first place. In El Salvador the division  between  the  affluent  and
the miserable had  reached  heroic  proportions,  political  repression  was
rampant, and the arbitrariness and brutality of the  military  in  favor  of
the affluent had provoked the formation of pockets of peasant rebellion  and
guerrilla groups. In such circumstances, a  number  of  people,  among  them
many of the best of the Christians, felt  that  they  had  no  right  to  be
indifferent, or to  remain  silent  or  inactive.  In  this  stormy  climate
certain priests and certain groups of Christians--a very small  minority  of
them-- veered gradually toward an idea of  liberation  that  was  definitely
more inspired by marxist ideas than by the gospel. Now, if  contrasted  with
this  faction,  Romero's  concentration  on  the  pastoral  aspects  of  his
ministry could easily be interpreted as a kind of statement  of  the  purely
spiritual mission of the Church, all the more so  because  Romero  had  been
openly critical of what he saw  as  the  illegitimate  involvement  of  some
priests in the political and violent struggle of his country.
      Certainly the  circumstances  with  which  Romero  was  confronted  as
archbishop of San Salvador brought him to the realization  that  certain  of
the priests with whose pronouncements and activities he had previously  felt
uncomfortable, because he had found them not quite in  line  with  his  own,
had in fact been more evangelically  perceptive  than  himself.  The  jesuit
Rutilio Grande, with whom Romero had previously worked, was,  I  think,  one
the priests about whom his experience as  archbishop  made  him  change  his
mind. However, it shouldn't be forgotten--and in this  regard  the  film  is
clear--that  till  his  last  day  Romero  kept  expressing  forcefully  his
conviction that "marxism and the gospel are not for  the  same  liberation,"
and that the kind of liberation in favor of which he  spoke  and  acted  and
for which he was ready to die was  "rooted  in  the  gospel."  The  pastoral
letters he wrote as archbishop--there were four of them-- make this  crystal
clear, and he persisted in his attempts to correct those  who  confused  the
two liberations.
      As for the kind of pastor Romero was  before  becoming  archbishop,  a
glance at the two years  (October  1974-March  1977)  during  which  he  was
bishop of Santiago de María should prove enlightening. Definitely, there  is
much truth to the  fact  that  Romero  had  distinguished  himself  for  his
apostolic zeal in his pastoral ministry. But did he think that  his  calling
as a bishop was to concern himself exclusively with spiritual  matters?  Was
he ignorant of, or unconcerned by, the economic and political conditions  of
his country? Was he in alliance with the conservatives?
      In June 1975, seven months after Romero's installation  as  bishop  of
Santiago de María, a  group  of  "guardsmen  raided  a  hamlet  called  Tres
Calles..., shooting and hacking to  death  five  campesinos  and  ransacking
houses in search  of  weapons."[2]  As  was  to  be  expected  of  a  bishop
concerned for the spiritual welfare of his people, Romero  immediately  went
to console the families and to celebrate mass at Tres Calles. But he  didn't
limit himself to that.  He  also  preached  a  sermon  in  which  he  openly
condemned the violation of human rights that had taken  place,  he  went  to
protest personally to the commander of the local Guardia,  and  he  wrote  a
personal letter of protest to President Molina. Does  this  reaction  differ
much from Romero's attitude after  he  became  archbishop,  so  vividly  and
dramatically portrayed in the film? In style, certainly, in that the  letter
to the President was private rather than public.  But  the  reason  was  not
that Romero thought that his first loyalty  was  to  the  government  rather
than to the people whose rights had been trampled, but  that,  avowedly,  he
still thought that this was  the  most  efficient  way  of  contributing  to
improve the situation. Neither then nor later did  Romero  want  revolution;
he wanted change. But he did want change in a country that, as he  described
it to a Roman Congregation  that  same  year,  had  "a  repressive  military
government"  and  "a  cruel  social  difference,  in  which  the  few   have
everything  and the majority lives in destitution."[3]
      In short, the portrait of Romero as a conservative or  as  unconcerned
by the political and economic realities  of  El  Salvador  lacks  evidential
support. As for his supposed weakness  of  character,  his  conduct  in  the
incident just narrated belies the accusation. In addition, had  Romero  been
a weak person incapable of making his own decisions and of standing  on  his
own feet, how then  would  the  outstanding  firmness  of  purpose  and  the
enormous  courage  he  showed  throughout  his  tenure  as   archbishop   be
explained?
      My claim, I repeat, is not that there was no change  in  Romero  after
he became archbishop ,but that there was no rupture in his line of  conduct.
On the contrary, a profound continuity characterizes him  before  and  after
he became archbishop. This, by the  way,  was  Romero's  own  perception  of
himself, as expressed in an official conversation he had in Rome in June  of
1978 with Cardinal Baggio, then  prefect  of  the  Sacred  Congregation  for
Bishops. The Cardinal grudged Romero for having become captive of a  faction
of the left and impatiently inquired  about  what  Romero  had  called  'his
conversion.' After  denying  that  he  had  ever  used  that  expression  to
characterize his conduct as archbishop, Romero continued:
      What happened in my priestly life, I have tried to explain  to  myself
      as an evolution of the same desire  that  I  have  always  had  to  be
      faithful to what God asks of me. If I gave the  impression  before  of
      being more 'discreet' and  'spiritual'  it  was  because  I  sincerely
      believed that thus I responded to the gospel, for the circumstances of
      my ministry had not  shown  themselves  so  demanding  of  a  pastoral
      fortitude that, in conscience, I  believe  was  asked  of  me  in  the
      circumstances under which I became archbishop.[4]
      Hardly could Romero, in my opinion, have defined his personality  more
accurately. Before and after becoming archbishop, and until  his  death,  he
was first and foremost a Christian for whom fidelity to the gospel  was  the
essential virtue. In this regard, as he lucidly saw it, there  had  been  no
change  in  him.  What  changed  when  he   became   archbishop   were   the
circumstances, which demanded of him a  new  pastoral  fortitude.  Of  those
circumstances I will speak in a moment, but first I want to comment on  this
central aspect of Romero's personality in  connection  with  the  notion  of
autonomy.   People often see autonomy as a supreme loyalty to  oneself  that
excludes, by definition, all  other  loyalties  and  attachments.  In  other
words, the genuinely autonomous individual relies  exclusively  and  totally
on himself or herself. Nietzsche with his  idea  of  the  Uebermensch  whose
freedom is unrestrained by the vulgar notions of good and  evil  that  cramp
the style of the herd, and the early Sartre with his notion of  the  genuine
individual as the being who at any moment defines his  or  her  identity  in
absolute independence from his or her past, are both representative of  this
idea of autonomy  and  have  been  instrumental  in  popularizing  it.  Now,
however attractive this romantic  idea  may  sound  when  preached  by  such
eloquent voices, its shallowness shows as soon as one reflects on  the  kind
of person a Nietzchean or Sartrean  individual  would  necessarily  be.  Far
from incarnating the powerful individuality  that  Nietzsche  attributes  to
his Uebermensch, a person without loyalties and attachments and  commitments
would be a non-entity, literally. On what basis, indeed, or by reference  to
what, would this individual make his or her choices and direct  his  or  her
life? What would motivate him or her to act like this rather than like  that
other than the unforeseeable, arbitrary whims of which he or  she  would  be
the toy rather than the author? By  contrast  to  this  weightless  gossamer
that would float without direction--this is,  by  the  way,  the  despondent
characterization  that  Sartre  himself  was  constrained  to  make  of  the
protagonist of The Flies when he began to realize the  consequences  of  his
supposed autonomy--we see the firmness and the power of  Romero's  character
in his unbending loyalty to the gospel. He  could  choose  his  own  way  at
every step, no matter how costly the consequences, precisely because he  was
deeply committed. Thus--to refer to an event that is not  portrayed  in  the
film--when Romero sensed disapproval of his conduct  as  archbishop  on  the
part of one of his Roman ecclesiastical superiors  (not  the  Pope,  by  the
way, who personally encouraged him to continue defending  the  human  rights
of the Salvadorans), far from being intimidated Romero simply
      ... put in writing that if it is for the good of the church, with  the
      greatest pleasure I will turn  over  to  other  hands  this  difficult
      governance  of  the  archdiocese.  But  while  I  have  it  under   my
      responsibility, I will only try to  please  the  Lord  and  serve  his
      church and his people according to my conscience and in the  light  of
      the gospel and the magisterium.[5]
      Unless I am very badly  mistaken,  these  are  words  of  a  genuinely
autonomous person. Needless to say, I am not claiming that one has to  be  a
Christian in order to be autonomous. My claim is, rather,  that  one  cannot
be genuinely autonomous without being deeply committed.  There  is  no  such
thing as the purely autonomous individual who invents and reinvents  himself
or herself out of the blue, whose future and whose past are only related  by
an arbitrary choice. Rather, commitment is  a  condition  of  autonomy  and,
most of the time,  autonomy  consists  in  fidelity  to  one's  commitments.
Romero was a committed Christian and, therefore, his autonomy  was  not  any
sort of autonomy but Christian autonomy.
Autonomy and the weight of circumstances
      One of the features I particularly appreciate in the film "Romero"  is
that  it  devolves  to  issues  that  are  often  discussed  in  a   perhaps
intellectually titillating but purely theoretical way  their  practical  and
urgent character as matters of decision and action.  Through  the  film  one
gets the real taste of Romero's own terrifying and terrified questions.  His
questions are personal. He does not ask what should  Christians  do...,  but
what should I, this Christian archbishop, do in this situation  of  economic
injustice and of already  ongoing  violence?  Should  I  preach  the  gospel
without any reference to what is going on, as if nothing were happening  and
as if nothing were at stake from  the  Gospel's  point  of  view?  Should  I
simply condemn violence in  the  name  of  the  gospel?  But  wouldn't  that
amount, for all practical purposes, to taking sides with the  rich  and  the
powerful against the oppressed and powerless? Should I confine myself to  my
pastoral mission of administering the sacraments?  Should  I  speak  of  the
right of the poor to a less inhuman life? Should I defend them with  my  own
body, not only with my words, against the arbitrariness  and  the  brutality
of which they are victims? Should I forbid  my  priests  to  deal  in  their
predication and in their ministry with what is happening  in  order  not  to
hurt anybody's feelings, or should rather encourage  my  priests  to  defend
those who are being unwarrrantedly victimized? And on, and on, and on.
      As befitted the nature of his questions, Romero did  not  answer  them
by writing books but by making day by day the decisions he made  before  God
and before his Christian conscience
--decisions to speak and to act for which he paid day by day  too,  and  for
which he ended up paying with his life. In a sense, it may be said  that  he
chose himself as a martyr.  But  how  free  was  he  to  choose  himself  as
something other than a martyr? Was his autonomy total?
      In raising this issue my intention is to question  another  aspect  of
the Sartrean view of autonomy,  which  he  identifies  as  the  individual's
capacity to choose what she or he will be. However, or so it  seems  to  me,
by thinking of  the  autonomy  of  the  human  being  abstracting  from  all
concrete circumstances,  Sartre  is  ill-prepared  to  take  seriously  into
account the weight of the circumstances, with the  rather  startling  result
that he thinks that  people  are  totally  and  equally  autonomous  in  all
circumstances. I think, for my part, that archbishop Romero's case  suggests
a more limited, even tragic, notion of human autonomy due to the  weight  of
the circumstances.
       Until he was nominated archbishop of San Salvador, Romero, as  bishop
of a peripheral diocese, had been less directly exposed to the  pressure  of
the government and the army. Under those  conditions,  he  had  seldom  been
forced to make critical decisions  and  thus  had  been  able,  as  was  his
personal desire, to concentrate for the most part on the  spiritual  aspects
of his ministry. As archbishop of the capital, however, he found himself  in
the center of the whirlwind and became  more  sensitive  to  the  plight  of
those members of the clergy who, having been closer to the  center  than  he
had previously been, had had to make decisions that now appeared  to  Romero
more conform to the gospel than he had previously thought.
      Barely a month after he took  possession  of  his  siege,  Romero  was
unexpectedly confronted with the gratuitous and brutal murder of one of  his
priests, Rutilio Grande, and of the two innocent peasants who  had  happened
to be with him. Clearly, that was the watershed in Romero's  pastoral  life.
Without waiting for permission from the government he buried his friend  and
his  companions  in  the  chapel  of  El  Paisnal,  he  called  for   public
demonstrations despite the state of siege declared by the  government  since
the massacre  it  had  perpetrated  of  its  political  opponents  in  Plaza
Libertad five weeks earlier, and he  wrote  a  letter  to  President  Molina
telling him  that  the  Church  would  abstain  from  participating  in  any
official governmental ceremony as long as the facts  about  Grande's  murder
were not clarified. Of course, Romero realized the risks he  was  taking  in
confronting the government and the army, but  under  the  circumstances  his
Christian conscience as archbishop left him with  no  other  option.  As  he
explained to Cardinal Baggio a few months later that same year,
      Concerning the risks that have been run in regard to the government, I
      believe it was necessary to run them, because the  reactions  provoked
      by the serious abuses  of  the  government  against  the  dignity  and
      liberty of the  church  and  against  the  human  rights  of  so  many
      defenseless people were necessary.[6]
      From that point on,  the  events  faithfully  portrayed  in  the  film
develop with a sort of escalating fatality, as in a Greek tragedy. Not  only
didn't the government make any attempt to clarify Grande's murder,  for  the
good reason that the government's involvement in it was  abundantly   clear,
but in collusion  with  the  army  the  government  intensified  its  brutal
measures against the peasants and against the  priests  who  refused  to  be
intimidated.  The  archbishop,  of  course,  was  among  them,  and  a  vile
defamatory campaign was conducted against him by the  press,  controlled  by
the government. The number of the 'disappeared,' of the tortured and of  the
murdered grew, and the persecution  of  the  church  became  more  and  more
intense. Each time, after consulting with others and with  the  approval  of
the overwhelming majority of his own  clergy,  Romero  protested  forcefully
and did all he could to defend the victims.
      Needless to say, Romero would have loved not to  have  been  compelled
by the circumstances in which he found himself  to  face  the  questions  he
faced and to make the decisions he made. He would have loved to be  able  to
devote himself to his episcopal ministry and to the preaching of the  Gospel
in a peaceful world. But about that he had no choice. He  had  to  face  the
world in circumstances which were not of his own doing. And, as  he  himself
put it, these new circumstances demanded a new pastoral fortitude  which  he
owed to God and to his people.
      Romero  lived  up  to  that  demand  for  fortitude.  Involved  in  an
escalating give and take with the government and the army, a give  and  take
from which he could not escape without absolute betrayal, he  was  perfectly
aware of what awaited him at the end. He received repeated  threats  on  his
life, and he was scared; we know this because he wrote it in so  many  words
in the last retreat of his life.[7]  Like his Master,  he  would  much  have
preferred not to have to drink that chalice. But  he  "had  pondered  before
the Lord [his] decisions"[8]  and he forged  ahead  without  deviating  from
his path. And thus, like archbishop Becket centuries before  him,  he  ended
up being cowardly murdered while he was celebrating mass.
      Do we human beings choose  our  identity  the  way  the  young  Sartre
claimed we do? I don 't think so. Wasn't Romero's autonomy severely  limited
in that he was constrained to respond to situations which were  not  of  his
own doing but purposely created by the army and the  government  to  protect
the interests of a small but  powerful  section  of  the  population  of  El
Salvador? Are one's choices as free when  the  circumstances  are  favorable
and one has power and one can choose what corresponds to one's  desires,  as
when one has no power and is constrained  by  the  circumstances  to  choose
what one doesn't desire at all? Was Romero's autonomy, and the  autonomy  of
the oppressed in El Salvador, the same as the autonomy  of  the  oppressors?
If Sartre is right, the answer is yes.
Of course Sartre realizes that  we  always  make  our  choices  in  concrete
circumstances, but he claims that the circumstances  have  on  us  only  the
weight we allow them to have. In other words, according to  Sartre,  Romero,
who  had  no  other  power  than  his  Christian  conscience,  was  no  less
autonomous than those who having all  the  power  on  their  side  chose  to
oppress and persecute and kill, and the oppressed were  no  less  autonomous
than those who, having all the power on their side,  oppressed,  persecuted,
and killed them.
      I suspect that one of the  reasons  for  the  popularity  of  such  an
unrealistic conception of human autonomy, which allows  for  no  distinction
between favorable and adverse circumstances and their respective  weight  on
us, is that it allows those of us who are favored by  the  circumstances  to
attribute to ourselves as individuals all the credit for what  we  are,  and
by the same token to blame for what they are those  who  act  under  adverse
circumstances. For my part, I want to end by stating that what I find  truly
admirable in archbishop Romero, aside from his Christian  commitment,  whose
strength  strengthens  my  own  faith,  is  that  under  the  most   adverse
circumstances and under the fear  of  death  he  still  somehow  managed  to
choose his own identity without deviating from his path.  Romero  is  indeed
admirable, for most of us in his situation, I am  afraid,  would  have  been
shaped by the very real weight of the circumstances,  and  thus  would  have
been left only with the hope that at least a few people more  realistic  and
compassionate than the young Sartre would have mercy on our  all  too  human
weakness.









-----------------------
     [1] I borrowed these data from  Plácido  Erdozaín,  Archbishop  Romero:
Martyr of Salvador, Translated by  John  McFadden  and  Ruth  Warner  (Orbis
Books, Maryknoll, New York 1981), p. 4.
     [2] James R. Brockman, The Word Remains: A Life of Oscar Romero  (Orbis
Books, Maryknoll, New York, 1982), p. 46.
     [3] Ibid., p. 50.
     [4] Ibid., pp. 115-116.
     [5] Ibid., p. 118.
     [6] Ibid., p. 64.
     [7] Quoted by Jon Sobrino, Archbishop Romero: Memories and  Reflections
(Orbis Books, Maryknoll, New York 1990), p. 41.

     [8] Brockman, ope. cit., p. 63.

