---
title: "97-JUL-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1997/97-JUL-1.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


\wp\97\97-jul-1
                       ON TRUTH AND EXPOSURE
      I return to the idea, which I got from Aquinas-Aristotle,  that  truth
is, in the first place, a notion that applies only to speech  acts,  and  to
one kind of speech acts exclusively, namely, statements. This leaves out  of
philosophical consideration  all  other  speech-acts,  which  happen  to  be
performative and emotive rather than assertive and  merely  objective.  What
is worse, this leaves out the agent-patient who takes his risks  in  acting,
the one who  acts  linguistically  and  otherwise,  the  one  for  whom  the
question of truth arises only reflectively or post factum  but  who  himself
is neither true nor false.
      Secondly, I think that Aristotle-Aquinas, as reflective  contemplators
rather than  linguistic  participants,  identify  statements  with  what  is
stated,  with  what  constitutes  the  premises  and  the  conclusion  of  a
syllogism, with the already objectified, written stated, with the  'content'
of the stating speech-act, not with the living,  spoken  speech  act  of  an
exposed agent speaking to other exposed agents. In other  words,  Aristotle-
Aquinas are in the contemplative, reflective mood, overhearing  language  as
pure contemplators, rather than participating in  the  dialogue  as  biased,
interested agents-patients.
      Thirdly, Aristotle's-Aquinas's  project  is  philosophical,  that  is,
foundational of what has already been or taken place and, on the  assumption
that the future will repeat the past, of what will be or  take  place.  They
are  not  involved  in  uncertain  interaction,  they  are  remembering  and
foreseeing as mere contemplators; their
concern is  with  a  'picture,'  with  a  'phaenomenon,'  not  with  dealing
appropriately in the mood of exposure. Thus not only do they objectify  what
is stated but they construe the real to which the stated supposedly  has  to
conform into a static, closed collection of objective facts--a picture.
      What has the above to do with truth? First  of  all,  if  truth  is  a
property of stateds, that is of predicative speech acts, then truth  has  to
consist in conformity between the stated or what appears  and  the  real  or
what is the case (for not all stateds are true).  Hence  the  conception  of
knowledge as picture or mirror. I have a picture in my mind and the real  is
something that must be pictured in order to get known. The  table  is  there
and I have a linguistic picture of this fact by silently  stating  that  the
table is there, and I  truly  know  that  the  table  is  there  because  my
linguistic picture corresponds to reality.  My  hand  hurts  and  I  have  a
linguistic picture of my hand in pain  by  silently  stating  that  my  hand
hurts, and I truly know that my hand hurts  because  my  linguistic  picture
corresponds to reality.
      My answer is that statements are not pictures and  don't  function  as
pictures at all, nor are statements foundational of  all  other  speech-acts
and actions  and  passions  (as  Searle  assumes)  in  that  only  they  are
cognitive, that is, only they are  pictorial.  Neither  statements  nor  any
other speech acts are pictorial. All of them are performative  in  that  all
of them, either immediately or mediately, aim at a word-world fit.
      "Es el Señor." From the speaker's point of view and  under  the  given
circumstances, it is a deliberate decision to respond to Him  as  el  Señor,
that is, to "be with Him" as el Señor. Knowing is not having  a  picture  in
one's mind, in which case knowing would be independent of actually  entering
into the relationship of being with as el Señor. Rather it consists  in  the
appropriate relationship itself, so that not constituting  myself  into  His
creature by deciding to constitute  Him  into  the  Lord  according  to  the
circumstances would amount to not knowing. In that  case  I  wouldn't  be  a
knower--a faithful in the particular instance, for  "nemo  venit  ad  Filium
nisi per Patrem"--and He wouldn't be known by me  as  the  Lord,  though  He
would nonetheless be the Lord. Therefore my not responding  to  Him  as  the
Lord would be inappropriate.
      It  is  this  sense  of  appropriateness,  of  adorandus  rather  than
anything else in the particular  instance,  this  coefficient  of  passivity
that corresponds to 'the thing in itself' of  the  pictorial  paradigm,  and
that makes more 'natural' so to say the classical conformity of the mind  to
reality than the Kantian conformity of reality to the mind. In  the  view  I
am expounding and I espouse, though, the conformity is not of the  mind  but
of the agent, and it is  not  pictorial  but  attitudinal-intentional,  like
that of the hand opening itself to salute another open  saluting  hand.  The
attitude is reasonable for it is motivated as appropriate,  but  it  is  not
caused but deliberate and decided,  ultimately  at  the  responding  agent's
risk who is always exposed  agent.  Actually,  the  appropriateness  of  the
response is not only a function of the respondendus own exposure,  but  also
of the respondent's exposure, for knowledge is  always  indexical  at  least
tacitly, since the relationship of the  saluting  to  the  saluted  hand  is
mutual.
      To repeat, statements  are  not  pictures.  It  is  not  a  matter  of
objective seeing-as terminating in  intellectual  assent,  but  of  dramatic
grasping in function of the agent's exposure and self-projection toward  the
future. Yet, is there no merit to Searle's point that saying "Ich komme  von
dem Land..." is not the same as saying "Ich bin ein deutscher  Soldat,"  for
the two statements don't mean the same, though under the circumstances  they
may provoke the same intended response? And is not the difference,  in  this
case, a matter of pictures conveyed by the speaker and meant to be  received
by the hearer? And is it not the case that one of the  pictures  corresponds
whereas the other doesn't and is not even meant as a statement?
      The very fact that, ordinarily, the American  soldier  would  use  the
expression "Ich bin ein deutscher..." in  order  to  be  treated  as  German
shows that statements, too,  mean  performatively  and  are  meant  to  mean
performatively, to be transcended  in  the  addressee's  response.  However,
Searle thinks that the essential linguistic  effect  is  the  illocutionary,
the picture to be grasped, that  language  (or  at  least  the  language  of
statements) is a closed, selbständig system only  fundationally  related  to
action, and that the picture is foundational-justificational  of  all  other
speech- acts and actions. I think, for  my  part,  that  the  picture  is  a
retrospective illusion, what one 'sees-understands' when one is not (or  not
anymore) involved in the linguistic game as  an  agent.     Searle,  though,
would insist that "Ich bin..." means  a  determinate  state  of  the  world,
regardless of any actions that  may or may not  follow,  and  that  that  is
what a competent  speaker  of  German  means,  independently  of  all  other
perlocutionary effects the speaker may intend in  the  given  circumstances.
But the fact is that  we  don't  state  in  order  to  convey  meanings,  in
Searle's sense, but  to  obtain  effects.  But  why  do  we  ordinarily  use
precisely "Ich bin..." rather than "Ich komme..." in order to be treated  as
a German soldier? Because there is a  logic  to  a  language.  However,  the
logic is dependent on the perlocutionary effects, so  that  we  would  begin
using other words if "Ich bin..." failed to produce the intended effect.
      The above doesn't detract from the fact that being  a  competent  user
of language involves being capable of "linguisticizing" in different  moods.
Thus "Ich komme...," in its original  sense,  was  not  meant  to  be  taken
literally,  that  is,  as  a  statement,  that  is,  as  respondendum,   but
poetically, as opening  an  imaginary  realm  to  be  enjoyed.  However,  as
irremediably exposed agents who care, we have good reason to grant  priority
to the mood of exposure, to  which  what  is  usually  called  "the  literal
sense"  corresponds  and  by  reference  to  which  all  other   moods   are
intelligible as variations from it.

