---
title: "97-NOV-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1997/97-NOV-1.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


\wp\97\97-nov-1                                    November 4, 97
      [This document builds on the basis of "\wp\97\97-oct-2"].
                             God is a proper name
Lonergan on God
      As indicated in 97-0ct-2, at least in Verbum  with  its  Aristotelian-
Thomistic emphasis on knowledge and scientific  knowledge,  Lonergan  treats
God  as  an  It  that  has  an  essence  rather  than  a  Thou  involved  in
interaction. Correlatively, he understands theology (though  not  explicitly
the act of faith) as a speculative scientific knowledge. Here are a few key-
passages:
      "Our knowledge of God's existence is just our knowledge of  the  truth
of the judgment, 'Deus est'" (p. 8).
      "Deus cognosictur  a  nobis  per  phantasma  sui  effectus,  inquantum
cognoscimus Deum per negationem vel per causalitatem vel  per  excellentiam"
(De Malo, a. 16, a. 8, ad 3m; cf. Sum. Theol., I, q. 84, a  7  ad  3m),  (p.
29).
      "Elementary reflection on abstraction is concerned with common  names,
the corresponding concepts, and  the  relation  of  concepts  to  reality...
Names are signs of meanings, and  meanings are  similitudes  of  things;  it
follows that names refer to things through concepts in our  intellects;  and
so the measure of the use of names  is  the  knowledge  in  our  intellects.
Because we know the essence of man, the name 'man' signifies the  definition
which expresses the essence of man. But we do not know the essence  of  God,
and so since meaning is a consequent to knowledge we  cannot  use  names  to
express the essence of God. - This clear reduction of meaning  to  knowledge
suggests that one has better  approach  the  problem  of  abstraction  on  a
profounder level, namely, that of knowledge and especially that of  science.
Now science is of the necessary and universal; but all material  things  are
contingent and particular" (pp. 152-153).
      "... consent is a motion of the will with respect to  the  thing,  but
assent is a motion of the intellect  with  respect  to  a  conception...  We
assent  to  first  principles,   to   demonstrable   conclusions,   to   the
affirmations of reliable authority (De Ver., q. 14, a. 1, c). Assent  occurs
when we judge a conception of the thing to be true. It must be  motivated...
it is the judgment as based upon an apprehension of  evidence  as  including
awareness of its own validity, as a truth in the subject rather  than  as  a
truth absolutely and as a medium in quo reality  is  apprehended"  (p.  61).
"... the reflective activity of  reason  returning  from  the  synthesis  of
intelligibilities to its origin in sense and in naturally  known  principles
terminates in a reflective act  of  understanding,  in  a  single  synthetic
apprehension of all  the  motives  for  judgment,  whether  intellectual  or
sensitive, in a grasp  of  their  sufficiency  as  motives  and  so  of  the
necessity  of  passing  judgment  or  assenting...    the  determination  of
reasonableness by sufficient reason, for clearly judgment arises  only  from
at least supposed sufficient ground" (p. 65).
      Lonergan  is  avowedly  interested  in  common  names  because  he  is
avowedly interested in scientific knowledge, knowledge of the universal,  of
the intelligible, ideally of the  essential  explanatory  propter  quid.  He
places  theology,  the  scientific  discourse  about  God,   together   with
metaphysics or first philosophy, the discourse  about  being.  Morevoer,  he
grants  that  both  theology  and  metaphysics  use  the  third   level   of
abstraction. But can God, appropriately and without radical  distortion,  be
object of knowledge in the same sense  as  being  supposedly  is  object  of
knolwedge? And can the discourse about God be scientific?  Or,  rather,  can
the scientific, explanatory discourse about God have  anything  to  do  with
the God of Abraham and of Jesus-Christ?
      As I observed  in  the  last  page  of  97-oct-2,  in  the  scientific
discourse of theology not only isn't the thinker-speaker personally  exposed
to the object (for, as in every skcientific  discourse,  the  object  is  of
consideration for understanding, not of deliberation for response), but  the
object itself is such that it doesn't  make  interpersonal  exposure  to  it
possible at all, for it as an "It" of the abstract causal order, an It  that
has an essence, a nature--though we may not know that essence.  Furthermore,
I asked whether Thous, persons involved in interaction,  exposed  characters
in a story, have essences, as do objects  connoted  and  denoted  by  common
names, objects which cannot be called in the  vocative  nor  can  themselves
call us in the vocative. In short, as the scientist  can  only  observe  and
deal with the seen eye, not the seeing eye, Lonergan  can  only  talk  about
the God known or knowable, the God-object (which by the same  token  is  not
the God addressed in prayer), not  about  the  self-revealing  God  whom  we
adore.
      Underlying all the issues involved here is the notion of  knowlege  as
representation or correspondence and,  consequently  of  truth  as  adequate
representation  or  correspondence.  "Names  are  signs  of  meanings,   and
meanings are similitudes of things; it follows that names  refer  to  things
through [similar] concepts in our intellects; and so the measure of the  use
of names is the knowledge [definitions--esential  or  at  least  causal--and
intellectually justified denotations], in our intellects.
Plato and Aristotle on knowledge
      Why did Plato  had  to  invent  the  eternal,  subsistent,  immutable,
purely intelligible Forms? Because, given the way  in  which  he  understood
knowledge, there was  no  other  way  to  explain  how  knowledge  could  be
possible. Indeed, in the first place, Plato saw truth as the  correspondence
between the knowledge in the knower and the reality known. For in  order  to
be knowledge, knowledge had  to  be  knowledge  of  the  real,  and  if  the
knower's knowledge did not correspond to the real it would  be  false,  that
is, not genuine knowledge. Secondly, Plato saw knowledge not only  in  terms
of correspondence to the real but  in  terms  of  necessary  correspondence.
For if the correspondence between the knower's  knowledge  and  the  reality
known was not guaranteed by necessity, the knower's possession of the  truth
would be uncertain and, as a consequence, it  would  not  be  knowledge  but
belief, doxa, mere opinion.
      Given these two strictures, knowledge, as Plato saw it,  was  possible
only in the hypothesis of the existence of intelligible, eternal,  immutable
Forms. Indeed, all sensible objects are contingent and  mutable.  Therefore,
what the perceiver perceives and takes for genuine knowledge may  be  false,
since in the case of contingent and mutable objects  the  correspondence  of
the knowing to the real is not guaranteed by the necessity of the object  to
be  as  perceived  and  not  otherwise.  Thus,  only  objects   that   exist
necessarily  and  are  immutable,  consequently,  purely  intelligible   and
eternal as the Platonic  Forms  were  supposed  to  be,  could  satisfy  the
conditions required for the possibility of knowledge. Of course,  Plato  was
fully aware that he was thereby relegating all  the  supposed  realities  of
the sensible world to the realm of doxa, of mere opinion or belief. Yet,  he
couldn't logically reject this conclusion, however unsavory and against  the
grain of common  sense,  for  it  was  dictated  by  the  nature  itself  of
knowledge.
      How Aristotle,  for  his  part,  dealt  with  his  Platonic  epistemic
inheritance is well known. To begin with, he  preserved  Plato's  conception
of truth as "adequation" of the knower's knowledge  to  the  reality  known.
Needless to say, "adequation" is just another name for  the  requirement  of
"correspondence"  between  knowledge  and  the  reality   known.   Secondly,
Aristotle also preserved the Platonic distinction between  the  intelligible
and the sensible realms. However,  through  his  theory  of  abstraction  he
managed to do away with the need for  subsistent  Forms  by  replacing  them
within the sensible world as  the  intelligible  essences  of  the  sensible
entities.  Thirdly,  in  order  to  make  room  for  the  knowledge  of  the
particular, material, contingent objects of the  sensible  world,  Aristotle
relaxed the Platonic stricture of the necessary truth of  the  knowing  act.
Thus,  he  divided  knowledge  into  two  kinds:  episteme  or   "scientific
knowledge"--the apodictic or  necessarily  true  knowledge  of  intelligible
objects (which  was  the  only  kind  of  knowledge  accepted  by  Plato  as
genuine),  and  "non-scientific  knowledge"--the   knowledge   of   sensible
objects. Of course, the truth of  the  latter  kind  of  knowledge  was  not
guaranteed by the necessity of its objects, which were  actually  contingent
and mutable.  However,  in  Aristotle's  view,  perceptual  knowledge  could
nonetheless be factually true  when  perception  obtained  under  the  right
conditions.
      It might be useful to refine this last statement by  bringing  to  the
fore a more complete version  of  Aristotle's  theory  of  truth.  Aristotle
acknowledged that concrete perceptions could  be  materially  true,  but  he
denied  that  they  could  be  formally  true.  A  concrete  perception  was
materially true if and when it was adequate  to,  or  corresponded  to,  its
real sensible object. In this sense, animals and children  may  be  said  to
know sensible objects. Yet, in another sense, they do not quite know,  since
they do not know that they know, and knowledge consists formally in  knowing
that one knows. Now, the grasp that one's perception is  genuine  perception
of a real object can only be the deed of an intellect that reflects  on  the
sensible data and finds sufficient reason for affirming  that  the  case  is
such as perceived.  This  reflective  intellectual  act  through  which  the
knower grasps the evidence as  evidence,  that  is,  grasps  the  sufficient
reason for affirming or denying, is what  Aristotle  calls  "judgment."  For
him, therefore, truth or  falsity  are,  strictly  speaking,  attributes  of
judgments exclusively, and knowledge can reside formally only in  judgments.

      Because for Aristotle knowledge in the full sense of  the  word  is  a
deed of the intellect and not of the senses, he is  rightly  considered  and
intellectualist,  not  an  empiricist,  though  he  acknowledges  that   all
knowledge begins with the operation of the  senses,  and  though  he  grants
that the senses are capable of attaining material knowledge. Thus,  in  that
he makes knowledge to be formally the deed of the intellect, and in that  he
retains the Forms under the shape of intelligible  realities,  Aristotle  is
Plato's child. However, in that he makes of the forms intelligible  essences
of sensible objects, and in that he  includes  the  realm  of  the  sensible
within the region of genuine knowledge, Aristotle takes his  distances  form
Plato.
      As to whether the Aristotelian relaxation of the  Platonic  notion  of
knowledge as necessarily true  (often  praised  as  Aristotle's  intelligent
pragmatism  by  contrast  to  Plato's   absolutism)   simply   amounted   to
aribtrarily suppressing rather  than  really  solving  the  problem  of  the
validity of the knowledge of the sensible world in the name of common  sense
is certainly open to discussion.  However,  I  do  noit  have  to  pronounce
myself on that matter. For my concern here is not  with  the  two  sorts  of
what Aristotle called "speculative," constituted by the two  sorts  we  have
so far considered, namely,  scientific  and  non-scientific  knowledge,  but
with the kind of knowledge Aristotle called "practical knowledge."
Aristotle on practical knowledge
      The already mentioned  modifications  made  by  Aristotle  to  Plato's
epistemology leave intact  the  Platonic  conception  of  knowledge  as  the
correspondence between the knower's knowledge and the  reality  known.  From
this it follows that if the word 'knowledge' emoployed in reference  to  the
practical domain is not going to be used by Aristotle in a merely  equivocal
way, it will have to involve the notion of adequation or  correspondence  to
reality, for such adequation is precisely the characteristic  without  which
knowledge cannot be knowledge.  By  the  same  token,  conversely,  if  what
Aristotle will call  practical  knowledge  doesn't  involve  the  notion  of
correspondence to reality, it will  follow  that  what  he  calls  practical
knowledge is not knowledge at all. Such, in fact, is is what  I  suspect  to
be the case, as the following exploration will show.
      Plato had made no clear distinction between speculative and  practical
knowledge.  He  placed  the  Form  of  the  Good  among  the  other   purely
intelligible Forms, so that the good action automatically  flowed  from  the
intellectual contemplation of the Good. The result was  that  Plato  thought
of the good person as a merely  intelligent  person.  In  other  words,  for
Plato, doing the right thing  was  a  form  of  knowing,  and  evil  actions
resulted  from,  and  manifested,   a   lack   of   intelligence,   a   pure
misunderstanding of what is good, not a moral weakness or deficiency.
      Aristotle, for  his  part,  was  more  sensitive  than  Plato  to  the
significant differences between knowing and acting,  between  assenting,  on
the one hand, and desiring  and  pursuing,  on  the  other  hand.  Moreover,
unlike Plato,  Aristotle  didn't  think  of  the  Good  as  an  intelligible
reality, either self-subsistent or the essence of certain sensible  objects.
Consequently, concerning the domain of the practical,  Aristotle  could  not
just modify and refine the Platonic heritage, as he did in  the  domain  ofr
speculative knowledge; he had to move completely on his own.
      Yet, there was at least an   important  point  concerning  which,  for
good or bad, Aristotle didn't quite free  himself  from  Plato's  influence.
Plato, as we were just reminded, had made of  the  good  a  variety  of  the
true; that is, he had identified goodness  with  knowledge.  Now,  Aristotle
could conceivably have moved in a totally different  direction  and  dropped
all  connection  between  the  speculative  domain  of  knowledge  and   the
practical domain of action. That would  have  constituted  a  truly  radical
departure from Plato, an entirely new  beginning.  Such,  however,  was  not
Aristotle's  way.  Indeed,  without  identifying  practical  knowledge  with
knowledge of the good, as Plato had done,  Aristotle  nevertheless  followed
Plato's epistemic tendency at least to the extent of claiming some  sort  of
cognitive or epistemic status for the practical.
      Certainly, in the Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle explicitly denied  the
possibility of scientific or necessarily true knowledge in ethical  matters.
Nonetheless he treats the ethical decision as as  involving,  or  consisting
in, a knowledge that he  calls  'praqctical,'  and  he  seems  to  see  this
knowledge that cannot be scientific as analogous to, though not of the  same
order as, sensible knowledge. Indeed, he explains the lack of  certainty  or
necessary truth of practical knowledge in ethical matters in  the  same  way
in which he explains the impossibility  of  apodictic  or  necessarily  true
knowledge of sensible entities, namely, by referring  to  the  particularity
and contingency of the entities that constitute the practical domain. of  of
actions, which are the object  of  practical  knowledge.  Indeed,  Aristotle
sees the action to be done under the particular circumstances in  which  the
agent finds himself or herself  as  what  is  known  through  the  practical
judgment.
      Aristotle seems to see decisions  as  judgments  of  a  special  kind,
namely, practical judgments. This  shouldn't  surprise  us.  After  all,  if
Aristotle was to speak  of  practical  knowledge,  he  had  to  be  thinking
croncretely of judgments in the domain  of action, for, as  is  well  known,
according to him, knowledge and truth are characteristics  that  can  accrue
only  to  judgments.  Now,  the  fact  that,  on  the  one  hand,  Aristotle
explicitly denies that practical knowledge  is  like  the  necessarily  true
knowledge gained through scientific judgments whose  objects  are  universal
and necessary, and, on the other hand, that he argues  that  the  object  of
practical  judgments  is  particular  and  contingent,  indicates  that   he
conceives practical knowledge  by  analogy  to  the  knowledge  of  sensible
entities. The question I want to raise is  whether such analogy is valid  at
all.
       We may grant Aristotle that any sensible object is particular and
contingent and, therefore, that it cannot be the object of a scientific or
necessarily true judgment. Furthermore, we may grant him that, since
actions are always particular and non-necessary, they cannot be objects of
necessarily true judgments. But are actions objects of knowledge at all, as
implied by Aristotle's analogy between sensible objects as objects of
speculative knowledge and actions as objects of practical knowledge? Let us
see.
      Surely Aristotle is equivocating when he speaks of the non-necessary
character of actions as if it were of the same kind as the non-necessary
character of sensible objects. Indeed, he himself grants that the actions
of which he is speaking in the Nicomachean Ethics are non-necessary in that
they are objects of deliberation. In other words, these actions may obtain
or not depending on the free decision of the agent. But the non-necessity
of sensible objects is simply their contingency, the fact that they can
conceivably be otherwise than they are when known or perceived, and that
they actually do change in time. Furthermore the sensible objects which are
the object of sensible knowledge are, typically, present for inspection. By
contrast, the action involved in an ethical judgment will be observable
when it obtains but is not present for inspection even by the agent for it
doesn't exist yet. A sensible object is present for inspection because, at
least supposedly, it actually exists. It cannot ground the necessary truth
of a scientific judgment because its actual existence, though supposedly
real, is not necessary. But in the case of the action about which the agent
deliberates, the action doesn't exist yet and, thus, it cannot be known in
the same sense in which a sensible object, though particular and
contingent, can be known.
      Finally, how can a practical judgment be called a judgment at all,
without equivocation, if what Aristotle means by "judgment" involves
knowledge of the real and is susceptible of truth and falsity, which is not
the case with a practical judgment? For even if we were to grant to
Aristotle that at least the agent (if not the agent's observers) knows the
action he or she has decided to do--something which I think cannot be
granted without equivocating on the sense of "knowing," it is clear that
knowledge is knowledge because it is knowledge of what is the case (hence
the requirement of adequation to reality), whereas the  practical judgment,
if it is to be called judgment at all, is about what is to be done and will
be done in the future. Now, what is to be done is not a fact, an "is," but
belongs rather in the family of the "ought." And, as Hume would have
argued, there is no state of affairs that can correspond to, that is,
verify or justify the truth of an "ought."
       Hence the ethical or practical juydgment is inexact, not akribos, in
the sense that there is no exact rule by which to make such judgment, not
in the sense in which a judgment about a sensible object may be said, if at
all, to be inexact. When I judge that the cup is on the table my judgment
is inexact in the sense that it may be wrong in that it is not necessarily
true, but it is not inexact in the same sense in which a decision is. The
rule for a judgment about a sensible object is the object as presently
perceived, whereas the judgment about what is ethically or practically
appropriate to do in X circumstance has no sensible object present for
inspection as its rule.
      But there is a more important reason for rejecting the assimilation
of the object of the practical judgment to the sensible as object of
speculative knowledge. The reason is that in the case of the action to be
done there is no possible correspondence or cognitive adequation. For the
so-called judgment is about the action as to be done, but surely the actual
action, when done, doesn't correspond to the practical judgment in the way
in which a judgment about a sensible object 'corresponds' to the judgment.
Another way of putting it is to say that speculative judgments are about
what is, and express what the knower grasps to be the case in reality. In
this hypothesis the sense of the correspondence in which turth consists is
clear: there is truth to the judgment if the real is as judged. But
practical judgments are about what ought to be done, about what is
ethically appropriate to do, and in their case there is no clear sense in
which an actual action could in any way verify or falsify the truth of the
judgment. As Hume could have said, what is cannot in any way justify or
legitimize or act as verifier of a claim of what ought to be.
      The conclusion to be drawn from these considerations--and this is my
basic point--a decision is "inexact" or non-akribos, and is not susceptible
of truth and falsity precisely because a decision is not a judgment at all
and is not knowledge in any sense. And since, according to ristotle,
practical knowledge is knowledge because he sees the decision as a
judgment, it follows that there is no such thing as what Aristotle calls
practical knowledge.
      Still another reason to distrust the Aristotelian  analogy between
the knowledge of sensible objects and THE ACTION AS THE RESULT OF A
DECISION. As acknowledged by Aristotle himself, practical knowledge is not
purely objective but has to be informed by desire or, to use Nussbaum's
expression,  it is "desirous knowledge." Unlike the speculative judgment,
which terminates not in assentful knowledge, the practical judgment
terminates in action in pursuance of the the goal. It is for this reason
that the truth of a practical judgment has been said by some to be the
action itself. But, if truth consists in adequation or correspondence, in
what sense can the action itself correspond to the judgment? It may be
answered that the action was judged as to be done and that the doing itself
of the action corresponds to the judgment. Actually, this is what led
Aristotle to say that the practical judgment doesn't terminate in assent to
what is the case, to the real, but in action. But then, again, the analogy
between the speculative knowledge of the sensible and practical knowledge
is defective, for the word truth is used in a totally equivocal way. In the
case of speculative judgments, as we saw above, there is a clear sense of
the correspondence between the real or what is actually the case and what
is judged to be the case. But surely there is no correspondence of an
analogus type between the decision and the action that results from the
decision.
Towards a conclusion
      The history of ideas shows that speculative knowledge, that is, the
objective knowledge of what is the case, of the real, independently of its
relationship to action, has been the model or princeps analogatum in
epistemic matters. Practical knowledge, by contrast, as distinct from
speculative knowledge, appears within the picture only as a later
development and, as shown by the preceding analysis of Aristotle's views,
is defined by analogy to speculative knowledge. Now, the conclusion we have
been forced to draw is that the analogy fails. Hence, practical knowledge
is not knowledge at all.
      The conclusion that follows is that what Aristotle calls practical
knowledge is not knowledge at all. Indeed, either the practical-ethical
judgment is genuinely predicative about what ought to be done, and then it
terminates in assent, as Aristotle suggests in certain passages, or it is
not predicative but genuinely practical, and then it terminates in action,
as suggested by other Aristotelian passages. Now, if it is predicative and
terminates in assent, then it is not a genuine judgment, for it is not
susceptible of truth and falsity. Indeed, no factual state of affairs, as
Hume would argue, can conceivably verify or falsify such predication. But
by Aristotle's own standard, a judgment that is neither adequate nor
inadequate to the real is not a judgment, for it is not a cognitive act. As
for the other alternative, if the practical judgment is genuinely practical
and terminates in action rather than in assent, than again it is not
susceptible of truth or falsity and it is not a genuine judgment. For how
can an action, even asuming it is the action judged as the one that ought
to be done, be said to verify or falsify the judgment. It may, at best, be
said to cohere with the judgment, but not to be adequate to the judgment in
the sense of verifying or falsifying it as a real state of affairs may be
said to verify or falsify a judgment. Thus, to repeat, we have to connclude
that what Aristotle calls practical knowledge is not speculative knowledge
but is knowledge nonetheless, but that it is not knowledge at all for it
involves no adequation between the judged and the real, which is
sAristotle's own definition of knowledge.
      Such a conclusion concerning practical knowledge is hardly new. After
all, didn't Kant separate radically the domain of action from the domain of
knowledge? Didn't he, in the second Critique, exclude the ethical from the
domain of knowledge by means of the absolute, unconditional, ungrounded
categorical imperative? And didn't he, in the third Critique, classify the
the judgment of taste as a not genuinely cognitive (though not merely
subjective) "reflective" judgment (where the universal is lacking and must
somehow be produced from out of the particular), by contrast to the
genuinely cognitive "determinant" judgment (where the universal, the rule,
the principle or law is given in andvance for the subsumption)? In fact,
then, for Kant, only the domain of  physics, where the intuition of the
object is possible, is the domain of cognition. God, freedom, the
immortality of the soul, on the one hand, and morality--what is to be done--
, on the other hand, are not known. The former belong in the domain of
faith, as mere necessary postulates [NECESSARY EXACTLY FOR WHAT? CONDITIONS
FOR WHAT?] for the self-interpretation of the noumenal agent-subject (as
opposed to the phenomenal subject, which is mere object within the order of
causality). The latter, namely, morality, belongs in the domain of the
ethical, of the rationally prescriptive, from which interested desire and
pleasure are excluded.
      It remains the field of interested action and pleasure. But this
field is thoroughly irrational, the field of animal action. Now, animals
are determined. But if people are determined, too, within this field, if
they act as biological objects, then they are not responsible, they in no
way choose to act interestedly or self-interestedly. The odd result is that
they are responsible only when they act in accord with the categorical
imperative, but not when they fail to act. They can be 'rational saints,'
but they cannot be rational sinners, anymore than animals can fail
ethically. Very odd, indeed. And, then, how can they have conflicts to be
solved by genuine decision rather than by waiting to see whether the
interested desire happens to be determinant or not?
      Itr is interesting to observe that, for all his radical departure
from the epistemic philosophical tradition through his "Copernican
revolution," which excluded the transubjective notion of truth as
correspondence with, or adequation to, the real, Kant preserved the idea of
the possibility of speculative knowledge. In fact, his Copernican
revolution shows Kant's conservatism. In order not to deny knowledge and
fall into skepticism, he had to exploit the weakness of the traditional
notion of knowledge as correspondence with the real.

Interpersonal
      But for the moment the point I want to make is that the Thou-
character of interpersonal knowledge (in which the agent not only makes
choices in which the 'object' takes part either as the end or as means, but
also takes part either as the end or as means in the 'object's" choices) is
one more case, and perhaps the thorniest, of the Platonic-Aristotelian
aporia created by the assumption of the representational nature of
knowledge and truth, which is belied by 'reality.' For, if in the area of
speculative knowledge the problem is already critical because the actual
adequation of knowledge to reality can be assumed but cannot be known, in
the area of the practical encounter of the exposed subject with the
surrounding world the very notion of knowledge as representational and the
related idea of the unitary character of the truth are totally shipwrecked.

Pre-objectifying and objectifying judgment
      Aristotle considers (speculative) judgment as a reflective
intellectual act in which something is predicated on the basis of the grasp
of sufficient reason for affirming or denying [whereas practical judgment
is not predicative but decisional and informative of action?]. What this
reflective intellectual act yields, when poperly performed, is knowledge,
that is, object known, object assented to as to the truth of what is
affirmed or denied. [The object assented to is really what is predicated,
the truth of the predication itself]. It can be judgment or knowledge quia,
or judgment or knowledge propter quid; what is the case about the object,
or the explanatory reason why it is the case.
      The predication that something is the case, or why is it the case,
may be silent (judgment) or verbally stated and comunicated to others
(statement). Even when the predication is silent, though, it is of the
linguistic order, since it is judicative predication, not response. Animals
respond to objects and recognize practically (by bracing themselves for
action) signs of the imminent presence of the objects that make them tick
positively or negatively, but they do not make predications, either
objective or interested.
      "This is water" was, in Hellen Keller's case, a judgment, a
judicative, at least inchoate (if not formal or stated) predication, not a
response. Her grasp of the concept expressed and her assent to its being
the case constituted her actual linguisticality, and it opened to her the
space of objective predication for consideration, as well as the space of
deliberation (connected with exposure and desire). Both of these spaces are
unavailable to animals because they are non-linguistic.
      I said that in Keller's case "This is water" was not a response.
Animals simply respond because they relate to and grasp only objects for
response, that is, objects in relation to the natural needs and desires
that determine their goals. Through trial and error, and thanks to memory
and practical imagination, they refine the efficiency of their conduct as
the means to achieve their goals (but they cannot use instruments as means,
or truly plan their own conduct to attain their goals). This is what
Aristotle means by "experience" in the higher locomotive animals, which
involves memory (and practical imagination).
      Animals, however, "non nisi parum participant" in Keller's
"experience," which mediates her responses, because being non-linguistic
they cannot objectify through predication in order to consider out of
curiosity or to deliberate out of concern.*
By contrast, Keller became linguistic, that is, transcended forever the
order of signs and moved to the order of connotation-denotation-judgment-
deliberation, in which animals do not participate at all.
* The consideration "out of curiosity" can be of the order of observation
of static ideal objects (geometry), or of real but abstract objects that
behave with strict uniformity (Galileo) in order to move to their
'essential' propter quid which can then be applied to the real world, or of
real but abstract objects which do not behave uniformly as is the case of
animals or of atmospheric conditions, etc. This is what Aquinas talks about
in his commentary on Aris's Peri hermeneias, though he doesn't seem to be
aware of the essentialy obserrvational and applicative character of
(Galilean) science and moves rather in the domain of speculative
metaphysics. However, the consideration out of curiosity may also be more
directly of the instrumental order and relate in an abstract way to the
real world of the practical imagination, though without actual distances of
exposure. By contrast to this, there is the deliberative consideration out
of concern, related to the real world of the practical imagination in a
concrete way and with distances of exposure.
      This linguisticality or objectifying capacity, this "putting the
world in abeyance" thanks to the linguisticality of human experience,
Aristotle attributes to a (spiritual rather than material) faculty called
intellect, which he divides into speculative and practical. But what is
supposedly the object understood? What was understood, if anything, by H.
Keller? She simply experienced "water" linguistically. That is, she
experienced water as something that could be

But this intellectual faculty is not a faculty of a personal subject; it is
just an ideal machine that automatically produces predications and,
supposedly, decisions, much as the sensibility or the senses of the
empiricists is suppposed to produce resembling pictures.
      The Platonic dualism involved in the "spiritual" faculty, a dualism
which Aris vainly attempts to overcome through his hylemorphism,
unavoidably results in the aporiai of the body and the soul, the internal
and the external, the speculative and the practical, the subject and the
object, the subject in the causal order and the transcendent subject, the
causal and the transcendental domains, etc.
      It seems to me that both the dualism and the resulting aporiai emerge
out of the substantification of language, as suggested by Heidegger. It is
language observed rather than spoken or heard in actual interaction. What
is retained is what is said (for nothing is heard as to be responded to,
and nothing is spoken to be heard). In that case, language ceases to
function as language and becomes a significant or meaning object (written
signs that convey a meaning complete in itself to be simply understood,
rather than to be subsumed in the applicaitve response) thanks to its
written form.*
      * Notice that in "Ich komme von dem Land..." what is intended  is  the
response. If the response were not intended when we state,  there  would  be
no reason to intend a response in this particular case. This shows that,  in
ordinary language  in  the  mood  of  exposed  agents,  statements  are  not
pictures, for they do not aim at assent  but  at  response  to  the  denoted
state of affairs as denoted. When, however, the  addressee  doesn't  respond
or brace himself to respond  to  thre  state  of  affaris  as  denote,  then
(unless one is already in the presence of the state of affaris  rather  than
in its expectation) what is discussed is  the  truth  of  the  stated.  Then
language appears to be  a  matter  of  pictures,  rather  than  "a  pair  of
practical  glasses,"  a  momentary  instrument  to  be  transcended  in  the
response.
      The predicative speech acts which  can  be  deemed  to  replicate  the
objective states of affairs are said to be cognitional, to   possess  truth-
value, and to be  foundational  of  all  other  speech  acts.  Truth,  then,
becomes a property of judgment-statements that fit or do  not  fit  what  is
the case, as Searle thinks. Example:
"Our knowledge of God's existence is just our knowledge of the truth of  the
judgment, 'Deus est'" (Lonergan, Verbum, p. 8). From this  it  follows  that
our knowledge of God is just our knowledge of the truth  of  rthe  judgments
concering the cause of God's effects
tkrough those effects.
      The predicating-deciding subject  is  forgotten,  as  claimed  by  Joe
Flay. What remains is, on the one hand, the objectified  "I"  which  is  the
subject in  a predication (when the predication has a personal subject)  but
is not a predicating subject, much less  an  experiencing  exposed  subject,
and, on the  other  hand,  the  objectified  predicated  together  with  the
objectified object  of  which  it  is  predicated.  These,  in  their  turn,
originate  the  Aristotelian  categories  and  the  subject-matter  of   the
sciences of metaphysics, rational psychology,  cosmology  or  physics  and--
incongruously--of history, ethics, politics, (logic), rhetoric, etc.
