---
title: "EVIL-3"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/EVIL-3"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.0
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\chant-93-Evil February 15, 93

On Being a Christian and the Problem of Evil

" It seems a long way from 'I know that that is a handkerchief,' to 'I know that my Redeemer liveth,' but Hick provides a deceptively short route. His epistemological analysis introduces a strange entity--the 'object of direct acquaintance.' He somehow manages to make a distinction between what I see and what I believe ." (Victor Preller, Divine Science and the Science of God: A Reformulation of Thomas Aquinas , Princeton U. Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1967, pp. 199-200). (See also p. 217, 220-22).

My understanding of the domain of faith does neither exclude doctrine nor render doctrine irrelevant. It simply displaces doctrine from the center and puts it in what I think is its rigth place. To use a concrete example, we Catholics do not go to communion because we believe (in the sense of assenting to) the doctrine that Christ is present in the Eucharist; rather, we assent to the doctrine of the real presence because we go to communion. This sounds paradoxical or even simply nonsensical. But think of it in this way. The doctrine of the real presence, when it was defined as a dogma (rather late in the history of the Church), simply expressed in words the practical understanding embodied in the Catholic practice ("actus" rather than "action" in Thomistic parlance--see Rogers' dissertation) of going to communion. This is why all those whose practice embodies that understanding find it easy to assent to the doctrine, whereas others find it impossible to assent to it. Now, those whose practice, before the definition of the doctrine, embodied that understanding did not assent to the doctrine, they practiced it. Try to prove the doctrine independently of the practice (as only those who have reflected on their own Catholic Eucharistic practice can attempt to do, since those whose practice does not embody the Catholic practical understanding cannot abstract thad doctrine from their practice either to prove or to discard it), and you will go nowhere, even with those Christians who read the same eucharistic texts in the Gospels but whose traditional practice does not embody that understanding. Doctrine, therefore, is parasitic on practice, results from reflection on the practice by those whose practice embodies the doctrine, and is, in this sense, secondary, not primary. Yet, this does not render doctrine superfluous or irrelevant. Doctrine facilitates the practice and the transmission of the practice, which shows the importance of doctrine. Doctrine, however, is not absolutely essential for the practice (the early Christians had very few doctrines to assent to, for they had no urgent reason to abstract the doctrine from the practice when the practice was not contested) and is subordinated to the practice both in that it is abstracted from the practice rather than the practice being deduced or inferred from the doctrine, and in that its purpose is to facilitate the practice and its transmission rather than the doctrine bing the reason for the existence of the practice.

"Of course all along the argument could have gone either way: if according to foundationalist canons ["that beliefs, to be justified, must be grounded in the certain" (p. 55)] much religious belief is not rational, then one can scrap either the beliefs or the canons. A striking fact about our Enlightenment mentality is that though science no more fits the foundationalist canons than religion, we have religiously clung to the conviction that it does, and so, while saying, 'So much the worse for religion,' we have continued to embrace our science. The religious believer has been challenged to display the grounding for his beliefs, but few have challenged the scientist to show that his beliefs are grounded in certitude. Many have struggled to show that they were, but few have concluded from the failure that then we ought to give up our science. Instead, the reluctant acknowledgement that our science does not fit the foundationalist canons has, in recent years, contributed to the demise of foundationalism. Until the work of Kuhn and his colleagues, science was assumed to be a paradigm of embodied rationalituy, even though the foundationalism supposedly embodied therein could never be extracted. No such benefit of the doubt has been extended to religion. And now that we have come to see that science is not foundationalism embodied, we have given up on foundationalism. When religion did not fit our canons of rationality we threw out religion, whereas when science proved not to fit them we threw out the canons. But giving up on foundationalism leaves our evidentialism dangling" (Nichols Wolterstorff, "The Migration of the Theistic Arguments: From Natural Theology to Evidentialist Apologetics," in Rationality, Religios Belief, and Moral Commitment: New Essays in Philosophy of Religion , Edited by Robert Audi and William J. Wainwright, Cornell U. Press, Ithaca and London 1986).

"... he stood staring at a stone which commemorated the death of a boy of twelve. Underneath he read the words He rests on the bosom of the Lord . Why do they accept it, he thought, as he joined the group standing with bowed heads round a brown box that was being lowered into a hole in the ground, why do people accept the fact of death with such unseemly and inhuman placidity, dreaming still that it is their sole link with an imaginary benevolence, instead or regarding it logically as the last indignity making us one with the kingdom of the pig and the dog?" (1)

In an apparently trivial though, I think, profoundly important sense, most of us Christians are Christians because we were born members of a Christian community. One grows up, however, and sooner or later, as a reflective adult, particularly in the midst of a secular world, one has to face the so-called "problem of evil," and decide whether one should outgrow one's native culture or ratify and assume personal responsibility for the "Amen" vicariously pronounced for us at the moment of our baptism. I am one of the latter. I have stayed home. Obviously, then, I have found that being an adult and being a Christian are compatible. How so?

The God of philosophers

Contrary to a relatively common opinion, Christianity is not, strictly speaking, the opposite of atheism, since Christians explicitly grant that their belief in God is not primarily motivated by evidence but a matter of faith. In other words, Christianity is not a philosophical but a theological position, for philosophical positions are characterized by their appeal to evidence as the criterion. The opposite of atheism as a philosophical position is theism, which is a philosophical position, too. Concretely, theism consists in assenting to the existence of a Supreme Being, usually called God, on the basis of assent-compelling evidence. Theism and atheism are opposites in that both of them are philosophical positions and each of them denies precisely what the other affirms, and viceversa. They are philosophical rather than theological positions in that both of them reject the legitimacy of believing in God on any grounds other than assent-compelling evidence. In other words, both share the same presupposition, namely, that the issue of God's existence is a matter that ought to be settled in what they call 'purely and strictly rational terms,' that is, in terms of assent-necessitating evidence. Needless to say, this entails, on the part of both theism and atheism, a denial of the legitimacy of faith , since by its very nature (and avowedly so on the Christians' part), their faith does not, and cannot, rest on assent-compelling evidence.

There is, however, a more subtle but no less important difference between theism and atheism as philosophical positions, on the one hand, and Christianity as a non-philosophical position, on the other. It is typical of philosophical positions to assume that belief is equivalent to assent. Hence the insistence of philosophers on legitimate or justified assent. For someone may assent unrestrainedly and unconditionally to, say, God's existence without his or her assent being rationally justified or legitimate. Assent is an intellectual act which is justified in the measure in which it is prompted by evidence, and it is fully justified only when the evidence is assent-compelling.

There are, thus, two senses in which a position may be classified as "philosophical." One , if it at least implicitly claims that a belief is fully justified and, therefore, amounts to knowledge, only if and when it is prompted by assent-compelling evidence. ( This is what Aristotle called epistéme . However, Aristotle, unlike the early Plato, came to concede that not in all matters assent-compelling evidence, in the strict sense, is available, and that it would be irrational or  unreasonable to ask for such evidence in such matters. Evidence is assent-compelling, in the strict sense, when it involves essential necessity and consequently absolute universality, so that a different case would be inconceivable. Evidence, however, can be assent-compelling without involving absolut necessity and universality. For instance, given the nature of our universe in which the speed of light is the highest possible, it is certain that the universe cannot expand at a higher speed, but this does not render inconceivable a universe in which a higher speed is possible. What we have in this case is what we might call 'factual necessity.' The evidence is assent-compelling, in this case, in that the assent cannot be refused by someone who understands the given facts of our universe, though it is not strictly assent-compelling in that it does not involve absolute universality. Still there are other matters, though, concerning which there is not even factual necessity. However, as long as the assent given is proportionate to the evidence, the assent is justified, though it does not deserve to be called "fully justified" in that it is not certain but probable ). Two , a position is philosophical rather than non-philosophical if it rests on the at least implicit assumption that belief

is to be equated with the intellectual act of unrestrained, unconditional assent.

Notice that the two senses are closely related to each other. Indeed, only because belief is identified with assent does it make sense to demand that it be considered legitimate only in the measure in which it is prompted by evidence. Thus, nobody demands that the feeling of pain be considered legitimate only in the measure in which it is prompted by evidence, since pain is not an intellectual act and certainly not an act of assent. In other words, the demand that belief be justified by its relation to evidence is parasitic on the assumption that belief is an intellectual act of unrestrained and unconditional assent, for without the former assumption the demand itself would not only be unjustified but irrational. (N. B. Pain, however, is not object-intending. Love, fear, etc., are. But they are not assent. Yet they may or may not be rationally appropriate. Thus, to be afraid of ghosts is rationally inappropriate, as is to love Santa).

Having said this, let us consider whether Christianity is a philosophical position. Is it? Certainly not in the first sense, for Christians cannot grant that their belief in God is justified only if it rests on assent-compelling evidence, or even that it is justified only in the measure in that it is prompted by evidence. They explicitly avow that their belief is faith, not knowledge, because it is not prompted by evidence, and it would not be what they call faith if the reason for their belief were the evidence available rather than God's authority. In other words, in the first sense, the position of Christians is not "philosophical" but "theological."

Is Christianity a philosophical position in the second sense? The answer to this question is thornier, for an overwhelming majority of Christians (or at least of Christian intellectuals) have granted for centuries that their faith , which they identify with belief , is indeed an intellectual act of assent. Now, for reasons to be explained later, I want to disagree with the representatives of this current, for I happen to think that faith is not an intellectual act of assent and cannot therefore be considered justified or unjustified depending on the evidence or lack thereof.

For the moment, however, I want to reflect on other not unrelated matters. In the first place, it is clear that, if we Christians grant the philosophical assumption that a belief

is rational, that is, legitimate or justified only if and when it is prompted by the evidence, and in addition we identify our faith with belief, we automatically condemn ourselves to consider our faith as irrational or a-rational, as it is indeed considered by both the theists and atheists who hold that assumption. Actually, it was to avoid the charge of irrationality or a-rationality that certain Christians invented the so-called praeambula fidei , which supposedly showed that at least those aspects of their faith accessible to reason left to its own devices, or at least those points in which their faith connects directly with truths accessible to reason left to its own devices, could stand the test of rationality, namely, that they result from assent-compelling evidence.

A second point. Why do certain Christians, who, like Aquinas, explicitly avow that our faith is not prompted by evidence, feel nonetheless that it has to pass, at least partially, the test of rationality set by philosophers? In other words, if they deny that our faith is an illegitimate or unjustified belief because it is not prompted by evidence, much less by assent-compelling evidence, that is, if they deny the philosophical assumption, why then do they still feel constrained to submit our faith, at least partially, to a test that makes sense only on that assumption? After all, this creates dire problems for them, since they acknowledge that certain other aspects of our faith that are inaccessible to reason left to its own devices cannot pass that test. Does not this involves them in endless self-contradictions or at least ambiguities? Why, then, do they not simply reject the philosophical assumption? Unless I am badly mistaken, because they cannot. And they cannot because, they equate faith with what philosophers call belief, that is, with an intellectual act of assent. Now, once this  identification is made, they are logically constrained to grant that a belief, that is, an act of assent, may be legitimate or illegitimate, and that it is legitimate only in the measure in which it is proportionate to the evidence, for it is of the very nature of this act to be rational rather than blind. Of course, this involves them in other self-contradictions or ambiguities. For then they are forced to say that their assent is not prompted by evidence but by God's authority and, nonetheless, that we assent on the basis of God's authority not because of the evidence we have of that authority but because it is part of our faith. ( Cf. Locke ). This, alas!, sounds as a very vicious circle, which we try to escape by showing that after all what God reveals to us withstands the philosophical test at least in those of its aspects which are accessible to reason left to its own devices, such as the praeambula fidei which include the existence of God as provable, that is, as a belief prompted by assent-compelling evidence.

Can such impossible quandaries be avoided? I think they can and should. Actually, it is my purpose to show that what we Christians call faith is not a belief, that is, not an intellectual act of assent and, consequently, that it is irrational to demand that the Christian faith be considered rational or irrational, justified or unjustified, on the basis of the measure in which it is prompted by what philosophers call evidence. Fron this I will draw certain conclusions concerning the old issue whether or not "the God of philosophers" is "the God of Abraham, God, of Isaac, God of Jacob, the God of Jesus-Christ." Before that, however, I make a pause to consider Wolstertorff's article and find out to what extent his views on Aquinas differ from mine. This will clarify what I have talked about so far.

Wolstertorff on Aquinas

(All references are to the above cited article).

(To avoid interpretational matters about the genuine project of Aquinas, I will take W's reading of Aquinas as correct. Whether or not it is so in fact is not my concern here).

W  finds some similarities but radical differences between the medievals and the Enlightenment, between Aquinas' natural theology and Locke's (and post-Enlightenment) evidentialist apologetics (78-81). Consequently he absolves Aquinas' natural theology from Barth's charges. "Barth's argument is with the Enlightenment, not with the medievals" (80).

I have no problem admitting that there are profound differences. Without the shadow of a doubt, Aquinas does not make faith dependent on evidence. "... even if the polemic of belief with unbelief should fail because the arguments all prove to lack the force of demonstration, its failure would imply nothing whatsoever as to the acceptability of the believer's faith" (80).

(It is correct to say that because Aquinas, as a good Christian, does not make faith dependent on evidence, he would not lose his faith if the arguments fail. However, in identifying faith with belief, that is, with unrestrained, unconditional assent of the intellect [and in admitting that the intellect's fully justified assent depends on assent-compelling evidence (?)], Aquinas does imply that the failure of arguments should entail the loss of faith. Indeed, as shown below, Aquinas is an evidentialist. Thus, Aquias would not , but according to his notion of faith as assent should , lose his fith). Aquinas works from faith downward; the Enlightenment, from unbelief upward. Can the difference be more radical? Yet, I maintain, W does not pay sufficient attention or, better expressed, does not attribute their proper weight, to the similarities, which I think rest on the identification of faith with belief assent . The projects may be significantly different, but the fact remains nonetheless that a migration is possible from one to the other and that the migration has actually taken place with disastrous consequences to the faith of many Christians. Was this migration accidental? By no means, if I am right. Indeed, it is my thesis here that Aquinas' project of theologia naturalis as understood by W  (and by most people, even before the Enlightnment) was bound to result in the Enlightenment's unbelief, given that the project of natural theology identifies faith with belief-assent, whioch coincides with the Enlightenment's project orf philosophical theology. In other words the changed conditions of which W speaks did not just happen; they were bound to happen, given Aquinas' project of theologia naturalis. In other words, the migration was not accidental; rather, Aquinas' project of theologia naturalis actually precipitated the change of conditions from which the Enlightenment evidentialism and its ultimate atheism resulted, for while denying that faith rests on evidence Aquinas nonetheless was an evidentialist.

Now, back to W's article.

According to W, Locke is both an evidentialist and a foundationalist, though perhaps not a fully consistent one. He is an evidentialist because he thinks that knowledge is knowledge only when it results from assent-compelling evidence. Since belief (as distinguished from knowledge), by its very nature excludes assent-compelling evidence, for otherwise it would not be belief but knowledge, belief is different from knowledge . (What distinguishes belief from knowledge is is the degree of evidence and the consequent quality of the assent. As for faith it is a different kind of belief justified by God's revelation (?). Nonetheless, belief, like knowledge, involves assent. For that reason it can be justified or unjustified. It is justified in the measure in which the assent is proportionate to the evidence. Thus, both in the case of knowledge and of belief evidence is the determinant factor. Hence the name "evidentialism," that is, the position according to which nothing can be legitimately assented to but on the basis of its evidence and in proportion to its evidence, be it 'immediate,' or strictly 'deductive,' or 'connective.' In fact, however, "evidentialism" is a name reserved for certain, unrestrained, unconditional assent, that is, for "knowledge" by contrast to blind or merely probable conviction.

Secondly, according to W, Locke is a foundationalist, that is, he insists that "beliefs, to be justified, must be grounded in the certain" (55). Certainty may be based on immediate or mediate--but in both cases assent-compelling --evidence. Except, perhaps, in the case of faith (?).

So far, Locke. What now about Aquinas, according to W? Obviously Aquinas is not an evidentialist in matters of faith, since he avows that many and even most of the truths of faith are not evident, and claims that even those which are susceptible of becoming evident are not assented to by believers primarily because of their evidence but because of God's authority. In other words, Aquinas would reject bluntly the Enlightenment's evidentialism which extends indiscriminately to all matters in which assent is involved, matters of faith included.

My differences with W begin to become visible when we ask a further question, namely, whether Aquinas is an evidentialist in matters in which reason left to its own devices is competent. I assume that Walstertorff would answer yes. Is this correct? Aquinas' project in natural theology consists in part in bringing to evidence those revealed truths which are susceptible of demonstration, thus converting certain truths of faith into knowledge. (N. B. If Aquinas does not think that he is converting certain truths offaith into knowledge, why does he struggle so much with the issue whetherknowledge excludes (religious) belief?) . It seems, therefore, that Aquinas is not against evidentialism per se in matters in which assent is involved , since he clearly considers it as a progress to convert faith into knowledge, and the status of theologians superior to the status of the vetula. In other words, his difference with the Enlightenment is that the latter would claim that in all matters, without exception, assent is fully justified only by assent-compelling evidence, whereas Aquinas has a place for authority and would exclude at least matters of faith from that rule.

However, saying that Aquinas is not against evidentialism per se does not adequately characterize Aquinas' position. Indeed, I think that Aquinas is as much an evidentialist as Locke or any representative of the Enlightenment, for he finds evidentialism as natural, as befitting human rationality, as demanded by human rationality, as do Locke and the people of the Enlightenment. Perhaps even more so in that Aquinas explicitly identifies the fulness of human happiness with the full sight, the luminous and immediate evidence of God to the human intellect, however unachievable that may be in this life. Thus, what Aquinas claims is not that evidence is less desirable and natural concerning revealed matters than it is desirable and natural concerning any other matter, but that evidence is not possible in most matters of faith, which is precisely what makes them matters of faith for the time being , rather than matters of knowledge. This stage of faith, however, will be superseded by a superior stage of vision, of immediate, beatifying evidence in heaven. Thus, even concerning revealed matters Aquinas shares Locke's and the Enligtenment's ideal of evidentialism as corresponding to the nature of a rational being . In other words, Aquinas is as much an evidentialist as the most enlightened children of the Enlightenment. His difference with them is that, being a Christian and possessing a profound sense of his creatureliness, he does not consider it below his dignity to assent without evidence, on God's authority, to what God has revealed to us, or that belief in God is rationally impossible because it would be below our dignity to have to accept without evidence what He would reveal to us.

Admittedly, Aquinas' evidentialism, is higly qualified .

Even among the truths accessible to reason, certain of them are difficult to reach because of the weakness of the human intellect. Furthermore, the majority of the people do not possess a particularly sharp intellect, so that truths that are accessible to more intelligent aned better trained people may not be accessible to them. This, indeed, is one of the main reasons why in matters necessary for salvation divine revelation was necessary. In addition, even within the sciences there is a natural subordination among them, given the imitations of the human intellect. Thus, within the same science a particular scientist has sometimes to admit on the authority of another scientist what is not evident to him or her, and certain sciences rely on the authority of certain other sciences as to the evidence of some of their principles. There is, therefore, in Aquinas' position (unlike in the Enlightenment's--though Locke, who was not yet a positivist, "a scientificist," grants that we cannot rely only  the certain, for much of what is needed for action is only probable; hence his foundationslism?) room for authority. Does this, however, detract from his evidentialism?

I don't think so . Amittedly, Aquinas grants that certain revealed truths surpass our intellectual capacity and are inaccessible to reson left to itself without the help of divine revelation, and that other truths which are accessible to reason are nontheless of extremely difficult access and even inaccessible to the majority of people. Yet, we assent to them because they are evident to God and the blessed , which is the basis of God's authority. Were they not evident to God, our assent based on authority would be rationally unjustified. And the same occurs in the case of the subordination among the sciences and on the reliance of one scientist on another. In addition, I repeat, Aquinas grants that the natural aspiration of the human intellect is to evidence, and that such aspiration will be graciously or supernaturally satisfied in our contemplation of God after our death.

Thus, unlike W, I see Aquinas as a full-fledged evidentialist and, consequently, I see the Enlightenment, for all the significant differences, which I have already analyzed, between it and Aquinas, in full continuity with Aquinas, rather than seeing the Enlightenment as a rupture with Aquinas, as W does. But is my difference with W significant, or is it rather the case of seeing the same glass of wine half-full or half-void? Let us see.

For W, the Enlightenment has to be an inexplicable accident, totally unrelated to Aquinas, since he apprecites and underscores what is different between them. In my view, by contrast, there is a close relationship between the two, so that the Enlightenment is in fact a natural (though most certainly not foreseen, much less willed by Aquinas) development due to Aquinas' views.

But why would the Enlightenment result from Aquinas' position as a matter of natural evolution? Oddly enough, W explicitly acknowledges the possibility of a migration of arguments from one to the other. For W, the circumstances simply changed. What was in Aquinas' time a religiously unified society became, God knows why, a religiously plural society. What people could accept effortlessly in faith became, God knows why, difficult or impossible to accept for later people. Whereas in Aquinas' times people were not evidentialists, they later became, God knows why, evidentialists. Are these facts as surd as W seems to see them?

I have already suggested that Aquinas was a full-fledged evidentialist. It is the nature of the intellect to assent in proportion to the evidence and, hence, to assent unrestrinedly and unconditionally only when there is assent-compelling evidence. Consequently, I claim, this establishes much more continuity than W sees between him and the children of the Enlightenment. Let us see now how this could explain the developments that led to the Enlightenment.

Is Aquinas a foundationalist? The question is of secondary importance in that W ignores it for the most part when it comes to the Enlightenment. At any rate, my answer is that Aquinas is no less a foundationalist than Locke. Indeed, for Aquinas no less than for Locke, "beliefs, to be justified, must be grounded in the certain." The difference is that for Locke the certain is what is known, that is, what rests on assent-compelling evidence. By contrast, for Aquinas the certain, in matters of faith , (does not Locke agree on this?) is what is revealed by God and because it is revealed by Him, regardless of whether it is evident or not, whereas in all other matters it is the same as for Locke: what is known as a result of assent-compelling evidence. Thus, Aquinas considers faith superior in certainty, but not in evidence, to knowledge achieved by reason left to its own devices. Furthermore, he considers the truths contained in Scripture superior in certainty to the authority of the Fathers, which for this reason yields mere probability . Similarly, he forbids in apologetics the use of merely probable arguments, for they would mislead the unbelievers into imagining that the Christian faith rests on such poor foundations.   

 

Practical knowledge

 

The God affirmed by theism and denied by atheism is what Pascal rightly called "the God of philosophers,"since both theism and atheism are philosophical positions. It is commonly thought that the rejection of the God of philosophers is virtually equivalent to the rejection of the God in whom Christians believe, so that if one agrees that the God of philosophers is to be rejected one should automtically be or become an atheist. Such idea, however, rests on the assumption that the God rejected by atheists and affirmed by theists is the God in whom Christians believe, the "God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jcob, God of Jesus-Christ," the God in whom Pascal believed.  Whether the God in whom Christians believe can legitimately be identified with the God of philosophers is a question that I will consider later. For the moment all I want to say is that, if we are to grant the assumption common to both theism and atheism, namely, that the question of God's existence is to be settled on the basis of assent-compelling evidence, then a reflective adult ought to be or to become an atheist. In other words, being a theist and being a reflective adult are incompatible.

What is at stake between theism and atheism is whether the existence of God can be proved, since only a strict demonstration can compel assent. Now, Kant, it seems to me, put his finger on the soft spot of all the proofs for God's existence: the necessity involved in them is a mere "idea of reason" for which there is no possible correspondent intuition . In other words, reason is incapable to tend a firm bridge between something accepted as a fact--for instance, the contingency, or the motion of what exists--and the existence of a Necessary Being or of an unmoved Mover. The necessary connection between the accepted fact and the asserted fact will always remain at least disputable, for there is no possible intuition that would confirm the existence such purely rational necessity. Not for nothing did Aquinas himself, who is commonly deemed to have entertained no doubt as to the validity of certain proofs of God's existence, feel nonetheless constrained to acknowledge their intrinsic obscurity and their obvious inaccessibility to the rational abilities of most people (1) . Were it not but for this reason, it seems to me, we are forced to grant that theism does not carry water, since it agrees with atheism that in order for the assent to God's existence to be legitimate it has to result from rationally compelling evidence, and the very disputability of the proofs for God's existence shows that the evidence is not rationally compelling. Indeed, it is fair to say that no to only the untrained minds to which Aquinas alluded but most philosophers who have devoted serious attention to the proofs of God's existence find them wanting. Thus, unless we are arbitrarily to decree that all those who have seriously reflected on the proofs of God's existence and do not find them necessitating their assent to the fact of God's existence are insufficiently intelligent or intellectually dishonest, and that only those who find the proofs valid are sufficiently intelligent and intellectually honest, we have to conclude that the validity of the proofs is, to say the least, disputable and, therefore, not assent-compelling. Hence my claim that being a theist is not compatible with being a reflective adult, whereas being an atheist is. In other words, "the God of philosophers is dead."

The preceding considerations take place at a high level of abstraction because they concern the purely rational necessity involved in the proofs for God's existence. For this very reason such considerations may be not fully persuasive to most people, as Aquinas himself suggested. Furthermore, the theists may rightly argue, the proofs for God's existence do not rest on purely rational necessity. Indeed, all of them begin with an accepted fact , not with a rationally necessary truth , and move from there to the fact of God's existence on the basis of a rationally necessary truth. As Aquinas himself remarked, the proofs for God's existence are not strictly deductive but rather inferential or inductive, since they move from an effect factually but not essentially known to us to its ultimate cause. Thus, before discarding the God of theism, we have to take this point into consideration. And because the teleological proof seems to be the most accessible and appealing to most people because of its relatively more concrete character, we might as well concentrate on it more particularly.

Let us be clear about what constitutes the problem of evil. The problem is not that suffering and death go rampant in our universe. These are tragic facts with which everyone has to cope as well as he or she can. As it has been pointed out again and again by many intelligent people who refuse to believe in God, David Hume among the most articulate of them, the problem lies in the incompatibility of this factual 'evil' with belief in God, that is, with rational assent to His existence.

Let us grant to the theists the rational validity of the proofs of God's existence. In other words, let us not dispute that a firm bridge of absolute, that is, strictly rational, necessity can be established between the accepted existence of certain facts and the existence of a Supreme Being. Even so, I claim with the atheists, the proofs fail. Why?

In order to give his or her rational allegiance to the fact of God's existence the theist has to have evidence that compels assent. Such evidence, however, is possible only if one ignores systematically the tragic facts of suffering and death, which simply amounts to considering them as insignificant. This, indeed, is the move involved in all the supposed proofs of God's existence, with the possible exception of the teleological one, which we will consider later. Where in the ontological proof, or in the proof by causality, or by motion, or by contingency, do our suffering and death enter as such ? They don't, at all. They are deemed insignificant, irrelevant per se to the issue of God's existence. No wonder that, given such filtering out, the proofs yield an infinitely perfect Being. It is only later, when the existence of an infinitely perfect Being has been 'proved,' that the compatibility of His goodness with the suffering and death that go rampant in the universe of which He is supoposedly in charge enter the picture. And since God's existence has already been 'rationally' established, the only issue left is how to explain the compatibility of these tragic facts with His goodness--a goodness that cannot anymore be rationally doubted or contested since it has already been implicitly established together with the fact of His existence. Thus, whether such compatibility can actually be demonstrated,  or--what is more likely-- whether the insufficiency of the explanations given is to be charged in part or in total to the account of the mysterious, incomprehensible character of the Infinite Being is ultimately of little importance for it makes no difference.

Needless to say, the atheists cry foul at the rationality of a procedure that concludes to the existence of God at the price of considering irrelevant to the picture such tragic facts as the suffering and death to which we are condemned. To see the athesists' point, we only have to reverse the order of the proofs. Instead of starting with any of the other proofs and establishing the necessary existence of an infintitely perfect Being, let us begin with the teleological proof without presupposing anything. According to our established procedure, let us not dispute the rational necessity involved in the teleological proof. In other words, let us grant that it is rationally necessary to infer the existence of a Supreme Ordainer if there is purposeful order in the universe. But also let us be true to the data, without filtering out what might inconvenience us for a preconceived agenda, be it theistic or atheistic. What do we have, then, as our starting point? At best, a mgnificently organized universe in which suffering and death are daily occurrences. Such being the case, what can be inferred with necessity from the existence of such universe? What sort of Supreme Being can be inferred from the data? A supremely intelligent, even (if you will) an infinitely intelligent and powerful Being who either is indifferent to the suffering and death of His creatures or directly or indirectly wills that suffering. "And that," to paraprhase Aquinas' conclusion to each of the proofs he offers in the Summa , "is what we call God." Indeed, if all the data are taken into account, that is "the God of philosophers." What sort of a God? The God so justly portrayed by Bertrand Russell in his famous parable.

"To Dr Faustus in his study Mephistopheles told the history of the Creation, saying:

"The endless praises of the choirs of angels had begun to

grow wearisome; for after all, did he not deserve their praise? Had he not given them endless joy? Would it not be more amusing to obtain undeserved praise, to be worshipped by beings whom he tortured? He smiled inwardly, and resolved that the great drama should be performed.

"For countless ages the hot nebula whirled aimlessly through space. At length it began to take shape, the central mass threw off planets, the planets cooled, boiling seas and burning mountains heaved and tossed, from black masses of cloud hot sheets of rain deluged the barely solid crust. And now the first germ of life grew in the depths of the ocean, and developed rapidly in the fructifying warmth into thevast forest trees, huge ferns springing from the damp mold, sea monsters breeding, fighting, devouring, and passing away. And from the monsters, as the play unfolded itself, Man was born, with the power of thought, the knowledge of good and evil, and the cruel thirst for worship. And Man saw that all is passing in this mad, monstruous world, that all is struggling to snatch, at any cost, a few brief moments oflife before Death's inexorable decree. And Man said: 'There is a hidden purpose, could we but fathom it, and the purpose is good; for we must reverence something, and the visible purpose is good; for we must reverence something, and in the visible world there is nothing worthy of reverence.' And Man stood aside from the struggle, resolving that God intended harmony to come out of chaos by human efforts. And when he followed the instincts which God had transmitted to him from his ancestry of beasts of prey, he called it Sin, and asked God to forgive him. But he doubted whether he could be justly forgiven, until he invented a divine Plan by which God's wrath was to have been appeased. And seeing the present was bad, hemade it worse, that thereby the future might be better. And he gave God thanks for the strength that enabled him to forgo even the joys tht were possible. And God smiled; and when he saw that Man had become perfect in renuncition and worship, he sent anothjer sun through the sky, which crashed into Man's sun; and all returned gain to nebula.

"'Yes,' he murmured, 'it was a good play; I will have it performed again.'" (2).

Of such God I have to say with the atheist Stendhal--and I think every reflective adult ought to say--"The only excuse for God is that He does not exist" (3) . If such God existed, it would be lovely to meet him to have the pleasure of spitting on His face.

But who are we to judge the Infinite? This won't do. If we are intelligent enough to come to assert His existence, we are intelligent enough to realize the sort of God we are asserting. And to that God no genuinely adult human being can say "Amen."

In short, the atheist wins the contest. It may make little sense that there is something rather than nothing for no reason at all. It may make little sense that the complex structure of the universe, from the DNA helix to the majestic balance of the galaxies, be a matter of chance. It may make little sense that the human adventure amount to a purposeless, anguishing trip between an original nothingness and the nothingness of death. It makes even less sense, however, to try to contain this senselessnes with the senselessness of a cruel or totally indifferent Supreme Being. It is infinitely more reasonable to say "Things are the way are for no reason at all" than to surmise the existence of an absurd Supreme Being as the reason for their being so.

What secures us against the hypothesis of the existence of such a God? The very nonsensicality of the hypothesis. And yet, this is the sort of God in whom the presence of suffering and death in the universe would lead us to believe. Of course, nobody believes in such a God. But this is precisely Russell's argument. We have simply invented the God in whom we believe; we have conveniently conjured out of the blue, against all evidence, a mysterious Plan in which all suffering and death have a place and a purpose, though nobody is capable of figuring out what the Plan is. For my part, I maintain that as reflective adults we should outgrow the belief in the God we have invented--the God of theism, "the God of philosophers." Atheism--that "long-range and cruel affair," as Sartre characterized it (4)--is cruel indeed, for it leaves us naked and without hope before the absurdity of existence, but it is an adult position. Theism is not.

A reflective interlude

It would seem that all I have said about the Supreme Being applies equally to the God of Christianity, for obviously it was that God Russell had in mind in his parable . Why, then, have I remained a Christian? Before answering this question I want to digress and make a few remarks that seem to me pertinent to the matter at hand.

The theism and the atheism of which I have been speaking are philosophical positions. What do I mean thereby?

For good or bad, the practice we have come to identify as "philosophy" started with the Greeks. This is not the place to expatiate on the nature of philosophy, but some general characterization of this practice is needed for my purposes. Confronted with the claims of social custom and religious authority, which demanded their acquiescence, the "philosophers" or lovers of wisdom found those claims rationally uncompelling and determined that only "the examined life," that is, the life conducted in accordance with rationally compelling evidence was worth living. Their ideal was a life grounded in what they called " epistéme ," knowledge that was always and necessarily true by virtue of its grasping what is always and necessarily the case in a given domain. No wonder that, measured against that norm, all customs appeared to them as mere conventions, for they always could conceivably be different, and all authoritarian claims as blind demands, for no reason was given in their support. Socrates' successful debunking of the pretensions of those who claimed to know how to conduct themselves rightly and to be able to guide others was systematically based on the demonstration that they could not show that the practices they recommended were based on rationally compelling evidence, and his own search for essential definitions was a search for rationally compelling evidence, for what is the case by virtue ofthe very nature of things and cannot therefore in any case be otherwise than it is grasped to be. If Socrates died knowing that he knew not it is because he realized his failure to attain epistéme . Plato came to think that the grasp of eternal, necessary ideas would offer the rationally compelling basis on which philosophers could at last conduct their lives rightly and order the life of the polis. For his part, Aristotle came to realize that Plato's philosophical intuition of eternal ideas was impossible since all human knowledge begins with experience. However he granted human reason the ability to grasp what is intelligible in the particular obects of experience, that is, what is so by virtue of their nature and, thus, universally and necessarily so. In this sense, epistéme remained possible. But whereas it remained possible, at least within limits, in the domain of what is the case, it was, according to Aristotle, impossible in the domain of what ought to be the case, that is, in the domain of the conduct of human lives, for by its very nature our conduct is always in response to particulars, not to universals. Hence the best that can be attained in matters of conduct is not epistéme but sophía , the practical knowledge irreducible to strictly universal rules that characterizes the genuinely wise who conduct themselves appropriately on all occasions.

It is, then, clear, that if Aristotle gave up the original philosophical hope of attaining universal and necessary knowledge in ethical matters, in matters of what ought to be done, he kept alive the philosophical hope of attaining such universal and necessarily true knowledge concerning the intelligibility of what is the case, as he claimed to have attained in his Metaphysics concerning Being. Now, to return to theists and atheists, at least in this regard both the position of the theists and of the atheists regarding the existence of God is Aristotelian and philosophical, in that both agree on the presupposition from which philosophy originated that only that can be assented to and fully deserve the name of "knwoledge" for which there is rationally compelling evidence, and both apply this principle to the issue of God's existence. True, the atheist and the theist disagree on whether the evidence for God's existence is rationally compelling, the theist affirming that it is and the atheist denying it, but the standard shared by both to adjudicate the issue is the same, to wit: the original philosophical

standard. It is in this sense that I maintain that both theism and atheism are philosophical positions.

My point will be seen more clearly by contrast to Christianity. Indeed, I maintain that the Christian faith in God is neither a philosophical position nor claimed by Christians to be such.

This practice was inspired by a cluster of interrelated convictions: (a) that the only valid alternative to arbitrary social convention and to blind authority is knowledge, the end result of "the examined life"; (b) that knowledge is a matter, not of sensing or of feeling, but of understanding; (c) that understanding is a matter of grasping something in such a way that the assent of the intellect is rationally compelled; and (d) that the intellect is rationally compelled to assent only when, by virtue of the evidence, the object is grasped as necessarily being the way it is understood to be and assented to. To say, therefore, that both theism and atehism are philosophical positions amounts to saying that theists and atheists share in common the just mentioned presuppositions by which philosophy is constituted as such. And they do, indeed. For the search for a proof of God's existence is nothing else than the refusal to take God's existence for granted on the basis of authority or of arbitrary social convention, and the consequent attempt to demonstrate that any intelligent person, whatever his or her previous social or religious conditioning or lack thereof, is rationally compelled, by virtue of the evidence, to assent to God's existence, much as any intelligent person, whatever his or her previous authoritatively induced convictions or lack thereof, is rationally compelled, when confronted with the appropriate evidence, to assent to the fact that the sum of the three angles of a triangle is necessarily equal to that of two straight angles. Avowedly, in the case of God's existence the nature of the evidence is different than in Euclidean geometry, because geometry does not concern itself with the actual existence of geometrical figures. However, both theists and atheists agree that God's existence can be assented to only on the basis

of rationally compelling evidence. In other words, both agree that the question of God's existence can only be legitmately answered in the philosophical, that is, the rational way. It is in this sense that both theism and atheism are philosophical positions. The fact that theists and atheists reach opposite conclusions does not detract from their fundamental agreement, as shown by the fact that the argument between them is not whether

God's existence can legitimately be assented to without compelling evidence, which would amount to the renounciation of the rational or philosophical way, but whether the evidence on the basis of which the theists infer God's existence is legitimate and whether the evidence available renders rationally compelling the assent to the existence of the God affirmed by the theists.

That such disagreement is actually possible may well call into question what neither the theist nor the atheist question, namely, the validity itself of the philosophical way, that is, the ability of reason to function as a neutral, undisputable, ultimate arbiter of knowledge, given that people who supposedly submit themselves to the demands of the philosophical way can reach opposite results and be equally convinced of the validity of their respective claims. To this point I will return in a moment . The point I presently want to make is that, by contrast to theism and atheism, the Christian belief in God is not a philosophical position. Indeed, we Christians do not claim to have reached our belief in God as a result of an intellectual quest and under the force of rationally compelling evidence. It is true that some Christians, Aquinas being a paradigmatic example, claim that God's existence can be rationally demonstrated. However, even in this case and avowedly so, the demonstration comes after they believe in God, not as a condition for their believing in God. (x) Now, because of the clear and avowed non-philosophical character of the Christian faith and, consequently, of the status of the Christian God, both the theist and the atheist would no doubt classify the faith of Christians as a variety of blind social convention or arbitrary authority. In fact, I think, the attempt by Christians like Aquinas to prove God's existence stems in part from the apologetic desire to show that, though the Christian faith does not originate from compelling evidence, it is nonetheless capable of living up to the rational demands of the philosophical way, at least concerning God's existence.

Of course, the respite of those Christians who submit themselves to the demands of the philosophical way is only temporary and of little avail. For the theists who submit themselves to the philosophical way will point out that the God of philosophers is not Trinitarian, and that there is no way in which the Trinitarian character of God can be affirmed as a result of rationally compelling evidence. As for the atheists, they will deny that the evidence Christians furnish in their proofs in their proofs for God's existence is either rationally compelling or legitimate, for exactly the same reasons that the atheists find unpersuasive the proofs offered by the theists. And this is not surprising, after all, since the proofs offered by Christians are the same as those offered by the theists who follow the philosophical way. Of course, this is not to deny that there are people who believe in God and are not Christians, but simply to say that the belief of these people, not being the result of the philosophical way, would be classified by those who give their allegiance to the philosophical way as the result of mere social conditioning or arbitrary authority, that is, as irrational.

Certainly, the charge of irrationality is a dire one and dire to bear when one is the victim. And it is in defense against this charge that Christians like Aquinas have been prompted to adopt the philosophical standard of rationally compelling evidence, while at the same time being forced to confess that their faith is not and cannot rightly be considered as a philosophical position, which at least in my view places them in a no-win and untenable position. For, wanting to win on both scores, they lose on both.  However, it is important to realize that this charge of irrationality has validity only on condition that the philosophical standard of rationally compelling evidence be itself valid. For, obviously, if the standard itself is irrational, it will be irrational to maintain that what does not conform to that standard is irrational. ( See Wolterstorff ). And this, precisely, is what I want to maintain, namely, that the philosophical standard is itself irrational and, consequently, that any philosophical position--be it atheism, or theism or anything else--is irrational, for it demands what cannot be achieved.

I will start with a reminder. Aristotle himself was forced to conclude that in the pracatical domain of human conduct, of what ought to be, epistéme was not possible. However, this did not led him to conclude that in practical matters of conduct any conduct whatsoever was equally appropriate, for there is such a thing as prudent conduct, that is, conduct inspired by the practical prudential knowledge he called sophia , though not by epistéme , the theoretical knowledge he found possible and appropriate in purely theoretical matters. True, from the fact that the universal and necessary knowledge that, according to Aristotle, is possible in theoretical matters certain people, like Nietzsche, seem to have, at their own peril and ours, concluded that all actions are on equal footing. Not so Aristotle, who thinks that prudence or sophia is genuine knowledge without being epistéme and is the approprite sort of knowledge in practical matters by the very nature of the latter. In other words, Aristotle considers irrational to apply to practical matters, to matters of decision, or demand that it be

applied to these matters, the standard of compelling evidence that is appropriate in theoretical matters. It is, therefore, conceivable that God's existence be legitimately adjudicated by a different standard than the philosophical one, much as it is conceivable to Aristotle that the rightness of conduct be adjudicated by a different standard than the one appropriate to theoretical matters.

With this possibility in mind, let us go back to the theist and the atheist. As already explained, both of them apply to the issue of God's existence the philosophical standard. It is obvious, however, that both atheism and theism fail as philosophical positions, for neither the theist nor the atheist can demonstrate that either the affirmation or the denial of God's existence grasps what is necessarily the case. True, the theist claims to demonstrate God's existence as a matter of necessity, that is, as rationally compelling assent. Yet, the atheist, far from being compelled by the supposed assent-necessitating demonstration, rejects God's existence at least until it is demonstrated to his or her rational satisfaction. By the same token, however, the atheist implicitly recognizes that atheism is not a rationally compelling position, that is a position necessitating the assent of any intelligent person, since it does not rest on a positive demonstration that God's existence is incompatible with the facts as experienced by the atheist. In fact, what the atheist claims is only that  the atheist filters out of his or her experience of the world the evil rampant in it, and that if the atheist took his or her whole experience of the world into account there would be no rationally compelling evidence grounding his or her assent to God's existence. However, the atheist is not thereby entitled to claim to have offered rationally compelling evidence that God does not exist, anymore than anybody who is convinced that there is no life in the universe except on our earth can claim to offer compelling evidence that such is the case. In short, I repeat, both atheism and theism fail as philosophical positions, for neither lives up to the philosophical standard. Thus, to say that Christianity is irrational because it does not live up to the philosophical standard of rationally compelling evidence is to say that the Christian faith is on a par with theism and atheism, with the advantage for the Christian that the Christian does not claim to abide by the philosophical standard whereas both theism and atheism claim that and thus disqualify themselves as rtional positions.  

Yet, in the above discussion I did not hesitate to side with the atheist against the theist. How so? In the name of what? Certainly not in the name of the philosophical standard. On what basis, then?

As noticed by Kant in the third Critique , there is a difference between the teleological proof and the others, in that it impresses us in a way in which the other proofs do not. Because of his presuppositions, which are ruled by his own "Copernican revolution," Kant lacked the tools to analyze in depth the difference. Why does this proof impress us in ways in which the others do not, whether or not we accept its validity? Because it is the only proof that engages us in a not purely intellectual way, because it does not aim at merely intellectual assent.

Compare the teleological proof to the others, whether you find them sufficient or not. For example, if there is movement there has to be a unmoved Mover. You perceive the movement, but not the immobilis Mover. You may assent, depending on whether you grasp a necessary connection between the two. And if you grasp that connection as necessary, you necessarily assent. But all that you can do, and all that the proof makes you do, is to assent to to the existence of an immobilis Mover, much as you assent to the fact that the sum of the angles of a triangle is equal to the sum of two straight angles. With the exception of the teleological proof, the same is the case with the other proofs, the ontological proof included. If I grasp that I am able to conceive of Something more perfect than which nothing can be conceived, and if I grasp a necessary connection between such conceived idea and the existence of such Being, I necessarily assent to the existence of such Being.

What, then, is different in the case of the teleological proof? That in the case of the ontoogical proof I reason as a participant, whereas in the case of the other proofs I reason as a mere observer. This needs some spelling out.

Why do I remain a Christian?

It would seem...

My answer to Bertrand Russell's parable can be summarized in Claudel's following three verses:

"Dieu n'est pas venu suprrimer la souffrance,

Il n'est même pas venu l'expliquer.

Il est venu la remplir de sa présence." (5)

Claudel is referring to the Christians' God, to the God who became man in Jesus-Christ. It is of that God and no other that what Claudel says can be said:

"God did not come to the world to do away with suffering,

Or even to explain it.

He came to fill it with His presence."

The first point is obvious. If God became one of us in Jesus-Christ, He certainly did not come to do away with the suffering of His cretures, for we do not suffer and die any less after God became man.

The second point may be less clear, at least to a certain kind of Christians who talk as if, because they are Christians, they possess a good explanation for suffering and death. In vain have I searched for the slightest trace of such an explanation in the Gospels. Jesus assures us that not a piece of our hair falls without our Father willing it, and that his own suffering and death are his Father's will. However, as to why our loving Father wills that we suffer and die Jesus is totally silent. Of course, I have heard many explanations offered by one Christian or another. I must say, though, that I have found none of them even remotely sufficient. In fact, those explanations do not seem to me even to scratch the surface of the problem. Do we suffer because we have sinned? What, then, of those who have not sinned, of the multitude of innocent children who are born blind, deaf, mute, disfigured, irremediably crippled? As Dr. Rieux, the atheist, tells Father Paneloux in Camus' novel The Plague after both of them have witnessed the long agony of a youngster, "Ah! that child, anyhow, was innocent!" (6) . Paneloux, at this advanced stage of the novel, is already too lucid a Christian to argue the point. Not so some Christians who refuse to acknowledge that there is no explanation for the suffering of the innocent. But what about original sin? That child, too, was a member of the sinful humn race, however innocent he may have been personally. Unfortunately, such an answer can secure us only a short reprieve, at best. Indeed, what sort of God has our God, the God of Christians, to be to make suffer personally an innocent child for a sin he did not commit personally and about whose commission he could do nothing? Let us not cheat ourselves and attempt to cheat others: we Christians have no explanation for suffering and death. Who can honestly attempt to offer a mother a persuasive explanation for the agony and death of her child? "The last act," as as Pascal said, is always bloody (7) . And, he could have added, even more incomprehensible to the Christian than it is to the atheist. For it forces us to realize that we believe in a God who wills the suffering and death of his creatures, even the suffering and death of innocent children.

But should we attribute that suffering and death to our God? I claim we should, whether we want to say that God positively "wills," or merely "permits" it. For we cannot say that He does not will our suffering and our death without denying our total dependence on Him. Indeed, we Christians cannot have it both ways, as we sometimes try to do. It is dishonest on our part to thank God for the good things that happen to us, and to forget conveniently that His will is not less at work when horrible things happen to us. The God who wills or permits the suffering and death of innocent children is the very God to whom we say "Thy will be done." In doing this we trust Him, as I think we should. In trusting Him we can even come to accept suffering and death as a grace from His hand. But we cannot honestly say that we see how they are a grace, or that we can explain to ourselves or to others why God wills us to suffer and die and how they are a grace.

And, thus, it would seem, we Christians find ourselves in exactly the same situation as the theists whose position I found untenable because it would them logically to believe in and indifferent or even cruel God. Don't we Christians, even more perspicuously than the illogical theists, believe in a cruel God--either a God who enjoys a play in which his creatures actually suffer and die, or in a God who, assuming He has good reason to have His creatures suffer and die, is callous enough not to deign to share it with us to at least make that more bearable? But if it is indeed to such a God that we Christians say "Thy will be done," should we not rather give up our faith?

Indeed we should, as Russell suggests by implication, if such were the God in whom we believe. But it is not. Something all-important is still missing in the portrait of the God in whom we Christians believe, something that Russell does not take into account, and that is what Claudel condensed in his third verse: "He came to fill it [our suffering and death] with His presence."

The story is told of Kathrine, Luther's wife, who upon reading about Abraham being asked by Yaweh to scrifice Isaac, commented that she would refuse to believe in a God who demanded such a thing of a human being. To which Luther replied: "But, Kathrine, that is what He did to His own Son."

Kathrine spontaneously voices the refusal to believe in a cruel, nonsensical God. On this she agrees with Bertrand Russell and with all atheiststs, as I do. As for Luther's reply, it is meant to be paradoxical. On the surface, it looks like a clever device to make Kathrine realize that, contrary to her own statement, she actually believes in a cruel God, since it is a God who wills his own Son's death. In fact, however, the very

realization that God did not impose on Abraham a suffering that He Himself was not willing to undergo is meant to show Kathrine that the God in whom she believes is a loving God. The God portrayed by Bertrand Russell may be the God of theism, but most certainly is not the God of Christians. And this is Claudel's point. The God who neither does away with our suffering nor offers us any explanation for it is also the God who became one of us and tasted our suffering and death in His own flesh, under the same conditions we do.

This is why we Christians find trivial the attempt to reduce Christianity to theism or to any other sort of belief in God, and why we cling so fast and so dearly to the truth of the Incarnation in the literal sense. For if God did not truly assume our condition, if He only took the appearances of a human being, if His incarnation was only symbolic, then He did not suffer and die with us; he only cheated us with a despicable comedy. If God only attached Himself 'juridically,' so to speak, to a particular individual of our race so that by decree what happened to this man may be said to have happened to God, then He did not suffer and die with us and our suffering is not filled with His presence. Only if He truly became man without ceasing to be God did He suffer our suffering and die our death, thereby filling them with His presence. And then, and only then, can we believe in Him and trust Him fully and die in the certain hope of our own resurrection in the flesh. For only in this manner does a God who wills our suffering and death without offering any explanation become credible. Jesus-Christ is God's supremely eloquent Word-Deed in which He reveals Himself as a caring, loving God. And though this does not do away with the mysteriousness of God, for in Jesus-Christ he does not explain in any way why it is convenient that we suffer and die, to the God who suffers and dies with us it is not unreasonable to say "Yes. For ever and ever, Amen."

I will end with two observations. The first concerns those Christians who, suffering from anaemic rationalism or ill-digested ecumenism, are ready to equate the God in whom they believe with the God of philosophers or with the God of other religions. We Christians may indeed have much to learn from those who do not share our faith in Jesus-Christ, but we cannot debase our God to the stature of any God who did not fill our suffering and death with His presence without thereby depriving ourselves of the only God to whom a reflective adult can say "Amen."

My second observation is addressed to the atheists and has to do with the exact purport of these reflections. It is clear that I am offering no proof for God's existence or for Jesus' divinity. For that no other sign will be given to us than God's Word-Deed, Jesus-Christ. For the reasons already suggested, I consider the search for proofs, the philosophical way, wrongheaded. Theism seems to me unreasonable; not so atheism. Being a reflective adult and being an atheist seem to me eminently compatible. Were I not a Christian, I would be an atheist, nothing else, given the suffering and death with which the universe is filled. But, were I an atheist, the only alternative I would consider worth exploring would be Christianity.

Xavier O. Monasterio

Department of Philosophy
