---
title: "CHANTILL-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/major-works/CHANTILL-1"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v2.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\monas\theodicy April 14, 1992 Theodicy and "Meta-physics"

Philosophy of physics is not itself physics but 'meta-physics,' a reflection on the scientific endeavor called physics. But not only are not they the same, but they are totally different--whatever the actual relationship between the two may turn out to be. That they are totally different is evident. All the knowledge acquired in philosophy of physics will not yield a single piece of the knowledge acquired by the physicist in the practice of his/her discipline, nor is the knowledge acquired in philosophy of physics in any way necesary to be a successful physicist.

If the two disciplines are different, confusing the two would necessarily lead to enormous mistakes. This much is clear.

Philosophy of religion and religion stand in a parallel relationship to that between physics and philosophy of physics.

Religion is not philosophy of religion, and philosophy of religion is not itself a religion or a religious practice. If the two are confused, enormous mistakes follow. Yet the temptation to confuse these two, and the lack of distinction between the two, have loomed large in the Western philosophical tradition.

Pascal claimed forcefully that the God of philosophers is not the God of Jesus-Christ. Obviously, such a claim can be meaningfully made only if some people confuse the two. And there can be little doubt that the people Pascal had in mind were philosophers. There is, therefore, some reason to think that philosophers have confused religion with philosophy ofreligion and have mistaken what they do when they philosophize about religion with what people do in believing in God.

Some clarification is needed at this point, lest we go astray. Philosophy of religion is a modern development. The philosophers Pascal had in mind were not engaged in the study of a concrete particular religion, or in a comparative study of religions, or in a study of religion as such. Thus, if they were philosophers of religion, they were that in a sense that needs to be defined.

What they actually practised can be better named, to use a traditional label, "natural theology" or "theodicy." Now, this intellectual discipline has a history about which some knowledge is essential for my purposes.

From theoloy as a practice to theology as a system [From sacred history to theology]

The notion of sience ( epistéme , scientia ) as a methodic search for truth and certainty with its own constitutive rules and leading to a complete system of logically interconnected, true and certain statements hierarchically ordered is Greek. It was first incarnated in Euclid's geometry. It was reflectively formalized and presented as the ideal knowledge by Aris in the Posterior Analytics . And it enters the Christian Western world, and is adopted by it, between the 12th and the 13th centuries with the irruption of Aristotle's works. From this cultural revolution arise our modern notions of theology, of philosophy, and of the particular district of philosophy alluded to as "natural theology."

If we take theology in a broad sense close to its etymological meaning as reflection and dialogue about God and religious matters or matters connected with God, theology was practiced within Christianity or the Christian culture since its inception, as it had been in the Jewish parent culture. Indeed, from the very beginning Christians reflected upon and talked among themselves about matters of their faith in an effort to understand them ever more deeply because these matters were central to their lives. To mention only one perspicuous and early example, the Fourth Gospel manifests an already high level of such reflection and talk. In this sense theology is nothing else than the spontaneous, constant  reflection on their Christian culture as Christian by the members of the Christian culture.  The same may be said if we take theology as as reflection upon and exchange about matters of the Christian faith by Christians for the purpose of discerning the genuinely Christian  beliefs and practices constitutive of the Christian community. The so-called heretical sects that originated in the Christian culture and were ultimately considered as deviations by the mass of Christians witness to such interpretive reflection upon and discussion about matters of their faith by Christians. Furthermore, very early, and partly as a result of the reflection and talk about matters of the Christian faith in the just mentioned senses, there was a sort of primitive systematization by the Christian themselves of the central truths and practices of their faith, expressed in the symbola fidei and in the catechesis. In all these senses theology is coeval with Christianity.

Two important and interrelated features characterize these theological prctices. In the first place, the interpretive reflection and dialogue to which I have so far alluded are intra-communitary practices. Their subject is the Christian culture as such, and the reflection and exchanges are carried out by Christians, among Christians, and for the benefit ofthe Christian community. Secondly, and by the same token, they are carried from the standpoint of the shared Christian faith and by implicit or explicit reference to the shared Christian faith, whose ultimate authoritative rule is the word of God in the Holy Scriptures. By contrast to these theological intra-communitary practices we can distinguish other theological extra-communitary practices.

The Christian communities lived, at least initially and for the most part, within larger communities which did not share their faith and with which exchanges were inevitable. This gave birth to a different kind of theological practice: theology as apologetics, that is, to reflection and exchange about religious matters for the purpose of preserving the genuinely Christian faith against the danger of corruption by the surrounding larger culture, and of defending it against the arguments inspired by other, different ways of understanding the universe. This defense of their faith and way of life by Christians was, of course, based on their own faith and way of life. However, insofar as it was not a purely intra-communitary matter and insofar as the exchange with the alien cultures attempted to be persuasive, it forced the Christians into a form of argumentation in which they could not simply appeal to the shared faith to resolve differences, for the cultures with which the exchanges took place did not share their faith. Lacking a definite commonly shared ground by reference to which the differences could be arbitrated at least to some extent, such exchanges were for the most part futile. However, they had significant side-effects within the Christian communities. One among them was that in the course of those exchanges Christians came in close contact with cultures--that is, ways of living, of thinking, and of interpreting the universe--which were radically different from their own and which were already sedimented in a sophisticated literature very different from their Holy Scriptures. This expanded their vision, for they found themselves enriched with notions and practices which could be assimilated to their own Christian culture without loss of its identity.

The Constantinian era defined the shape that Christianity

as a fully institutionalized culture would take and keep until the Renaissance. The Church took charge of formal schooling, which was for the most part reserved to the affluent class and the members of the clergy. This institutionalization of Christian schooling, which by the XIth century will result in the creation of the medieval universities, introduced a significant transformation in the theological practice to which I have been referring. Theology, which initially had been carried out in a rather informal way together with preaching and cathechesis, became the field of specialization (to use modern language) of those destined to the priesthood and progressively acquired the identity of a specialized scholarly discipline integrated into a larger preparatory curriculum. As we will see in a moment, this change would pave the way for the revolutionary events of the XIIth-XIIIth centuries. However, we are not there yet.

None would be more influential than Saint Augustine in determining the path that the theological practice, that is, the Christian reflection on Christian matters, would follow within the institutional framework of the Constantinian epoch and thereafter. Van Steenberghen portrays his influence as follows:

[LA PHILO AU XIIIE SIECLE, MY NOTES ON ENTRY # 19 OF CHANTILL-BIBLIOGR].

This shift from theology as a practice to theology as a particular field of knowledge, as an intellectual discipline among others, however privileged its status may have been

considered, deserves particular attention.

The theological practices of early Christianity were fundamentally practical. They responded to the needs of the members of the Christian culture as these needs arose and were felt by them in living as members of that culture, and their purpose itself was practical--to enhance the Christian life of the community. If what we might consider as "knowledge" was involved or pursued in the original theological practices, it was not pursued for its own sake, as the goal itself of the practices, but rather as a means to protect and enhance the Christian life. To give an example, the Symbola were not created for such theoretical purposes as gaining or giving information or explanation about God and matters related to the Christian way, but for the practical purpose of favoring the orthopraxis of the Christian way and of discouraging and discarding the malpractices. The same may be said of the catechesis and of the predication. In short, insofar as theology involved reflection, it was practical reflection.

The reading and the study of the Scripture, too, had the same practical purpose. Christians did not read and meditate the Scripture for the purpose of satisfying their intellectual curiosity but as a practical expression of their faith and in order to deepen and intensify their own practice of it. Preachers did not study the Scripture out of a mere desire to know (as one may study the literature of an alien culture to gain knowledge about it), but in order to find in it the rule of life of the Christian community and to move their audiences to practice the Christian way of life. [GADAMER'S 'APPLICATION'].

All this changed gradually with the progressive professionalization of theology and its transformation into a specialized field of study. The intention, no doubt, remained practical; those who studied theology were preparing themselves for the pastoral life, and their study of other disciplines
