---
title: "98-APR-3"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1998/98-APR-3.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


\wp\98\98-apr-1 (I begin this modified version of <wp\98\98-apr-1> on  April
28.
                       ON WRITTEN AND SPOKEN LANGUAGE

      Kant's  definition  of  faith:  "If  the  assent  is  sufficient  only
      subjectively  and  is  at  the  same  time  regarded  as   objectively
      insufficient, then it is called faith" (B850). Hence, God, freedom and
      immortality are matters of faith, not of knowledge.

      Adorno and rhetoric in philosophy: In its dependence-patent or latent--
      on texts, philosophy admits its linguistic nature which the  ideal  of
      the method leads it to deny in vain" (Negative Dailectics).  In  other
      words, the words used to express an idea constitute the idea; to  talk
      about an idea apart from its mode of expression vitiates the  argument
      being presented. Words carry more than their denotative  meaning:  how
      something is said is as important as what is said. One must examine  a
      philosopher's  rhetoric  to  fully  appreciate  and   understand   the
      positions the philosospher represents.

      Je n'oserais sans doute pas écrire, ce que pourtant je pense, que tout
      cela, Boyer inclus, est une sequelle, ou simplement une manifestation,
      du philosophisme endémique dans l'Eglise depuis ses origines mais  qui
      s'est installé à demeure dans la Scolastique depuis le  XIIIe  siècle.
      Pour un saint Thomas et quelques autres, qui ont magnifiquement dévoré
      l'obstacle, et se sont même hissés et haussés sur lui,  des  centaines
      de 'rationalistes' de bas vol ont buté dessus. Le P. Boyer me  demanda
      un jour un article... et me proposa, entre  autres  thèmes  possibles,
      les deux suivants: 1. Philosophia fundamentalis necessaria ad salutem;
      2. Doctrina S. Thomae Aquinatis in omnibus sequenda. Je lui  répondis,
      en substance, que les deux propositions étaient  contradictoires...  -
      Voilà ce qui est affreux: l'orthodoxie aux mains de ses  destructeurs.
      Le drame du modernisme fut que la théologie gâtée de  ses  adversaires
      etait, pour beaucoup, responsable de ses erreurs. Il avait tort,  mais
      la répression fut conduite par des hommes qui n'avaient pas raison, et
      dont la pseudo-théologie rendait une  réaction  moderniste  inévitable
      (p. 127).
      Vous êtes un théologien de haute  lignée,  mais  vous  êtes  aussi  un
      humaniste selon la grande tradition des théologiens humanistes.  Ceux-
      ci n'aiment guère les scolastiques, et les scolastiques les  détestent
      généralement. Pourquoi? C'est en partie, je  pense,  parce  qu'ils  ne
      comprennent que les propositions simples, univoques  ou  qui  semblent
      l'être. Vous vous intéressez plutôt à la vérité que la proposition  se
      propose de formuler et qui lui échappe toujours pour une  part.  Alors
      eux ne comprennent plus bien, il s'inquiètent et, comme ils ne peuvent
      être certains que ce qui leur échappe n'est pas faux,  ils  condamnent
      par principe, parce que c'est plus sûr. Votre perle sans prix m'arrive
      à point... Il y a du P. Boyer là-dessus... Quand je leur  cite  du  S.
      Thomas sur la foi, ils m'accusent de fidéisme. Non, mais  de  'pencher
      dangereusement vers le fidéisme.' Je ne leur réponds jamais (pp.  128-
      129) (Lettres de Gilson à de Lubac, citées par de Lubac,  Mémoire  sur
      l'occasion de mes écrits, Culture et Vérité, Namur, 1989).
      My meditation in  "Caputo"  and  "Capu-2"  touched  on  two  important
points that demand exploration: (1) Written and  spoken  language,  and  (2)
Deconstruction from the Greek contemplator's and from the Christian  agent's
standpoints. The two are interrelated. I will begin with the first.
      On p. 6 of Capu-2 I wrote, with some modifications:
      But Caputo and Derrida and philosophical deconstructionists are wrong.
      Their undecidability is the undecidability of written texts,  a  post-
      factum undecidability. In that case undecidability means impossibility
      of attributing with certainty  one  particular  meaning  to  one  text
      rather  than  impossibility  of  responding   applicatively   in   one
      particular way  to  one  linguistic  piece.  Spoken  language--on  the
      speaker's part-- does not produce a text to be  considered  or  to  be
      decided about. That is a wrongheaded  view  of  language  grounded  in
      saying-that and the  said.  Spoken  language  is  not  like  that.  In
      addressing others, the  speaker  produces  something  already  defined
      intentionally by decision, without the security of episteme but within
      the 'secure' parameters  of  practical  commitment--something  already
      decided by virtue of its being spoken-done, a speech-act that aims  at
      certain effects.  And  by  responding  the  addressee,  too,  produces
      something already defined by decision, something already decided.

      And on p. 9 I wrote:

      In other words, the deconstructive enterprise has philosophical  roots
      and  applies  primarily  to   philosophical   texts,   that   is,   to
      propositional, genuinely truth-claiming, written, grounded texts (like
      Euclidean geometry), whereas ordinary statements  in  spoken  language
      are primarily referential to object for response. Grounded  texts  are
      generally the result of the  grounding,  demonstrative,  philosophical
      enterprise that appeals to  the  intellect  exclusively.  Such  texts,
      however, as well as the grounding philosophical (not  the  rhetorical,
      persuasive, interactive) enterprise are out after deconstruction. What
      is left? What  the  deconstructionists  have  no  inkling  of:  spoken
      interactive  language  inseparably  connected   with   practices   and
      practices inseparably connected with spoken language, neither of which
      is reducible to what the deconstructionists understand by "texts"  and
      "language."
On Searle's radical mistake
      In Speech acts Searle is examining language  as  an  object-instrument
before his eyes, reflecting on language and writing  about  it.  He  is  not
engaged  in  actual  linguistic  interchange.   Moreover,   as   a   typical
traditional philosopher, he examines language and writes  about  it  with  a
truth-claiming, truth-redeeming intention or interest, whereas the  ordinary
intention of speaker and addressee is not truth-claiming, much  less  truth-
redeeming through sufficient reason. Hence the only speech-act  Searle  uses
in his book, (if written language, that is, can be deemed to be composed  of
speech-acts), is statements and combinations thereof into  arguments.  Hence
his privileging of statements among speech acts, and  his  misinterpretation
of them as truth-containing or truth-claiming.
      I am convinced that Searle is confusing in his analysis what he, as  a
philosopher with a philosophical agenda, is doing when he is reflecting  and
writing on language, with what he and  others  do  when  they  are  actually
involved in ordinary linguistic commerce or interchange with  others.  As  a
result, he equates spoken  with  written  language  (and,  in  the  case  of
statements, with written philosophical language) and reduces the  former  to
the latter.
      As for the profound differences between  oral  and  written  language,
consider simply the point that, when written language functions as such  and
not merely as an equivalent substitute for spoken language (as it may do  in
the case of letters, for instance), it neither  produces  nor  is  meant  to
produce any perlocutionary  effects.  The  reason  is  that,  unlike  spoken
language, written language has  no  particular  speaker  and  no  particular
addressee  related  personally  to  each   other   under   commonly   shared
circumstances. Thus there is no  possibility  that  the  speaker  intend  to
produce any linguistic effects on or through  the  addressee.  By  the  same
token the  only  effect  that  written  language  can  produce  and  aim  at
producing is being understood. Now, since Searle is reflecting  on  language
rather than being involved in speaking and being  addressed,  he  attributes
to spoken language the effect that is characteristic of  written  language--
namely,  being  understood.  Furthermore,   since   he   cannot   find   any
perlocutionary effect characteristic  of  statements,  because  he  analyzes
written statements, which have no perlocutionary force by  virtue  of  their
meaning, he misunderstands the way  statements  actually  function  in  oral
language as if they were pictures and, therefore, as possessing  the  unique
characteristic of being truth-containing  or  truth-claiming,.  Needless  to
say, he is not alone in his mistake, for the philosophical tradition  within
which he belongs originated in the same mistake and was guided by  the  same
truth-claiming intention.
      A test-question for my hypothesis on Searle is whether  there  is  any
significant difference between  the  statements  he  makes  about  language,
which are merely to be understood--and sometimes, in addition,  agreed  with
as correct pictures of language--and  a  statement  made  by  one  agent  to
another under shared circumstances, like "Your  mother  is  on  the  phone,"
which,  contrary  to  what  Searle  asumnes,  aims  at  what  he   calls   a
perlocutionary effect, a conduct related to the phone where the  addressee's
mother is waiting.
Statements in written language and the philosophical tradition
      The view of speech-acts as acts that produce effects as  well  as  the
distinction among speech-acts by their intended effects has  its  origin  in
the consideration of oral language. Indeed, ordinary language  is  oral.  In
oral  language  one   can   distinguish   speech-acts   by   the   effects--
perlocutionary effects, for, I think,  there  are  no  merely  illocutionary
ones--that the speaker achieves or at least  intends,  either  intrinsically
by virtue of the sheer abstract meaning,  or  circumstantially.  In  written
language, however, where there  is  no  definite  speaker  and  no  definite
addressee and no shared situation, where consequently no other  effect  than
understanding can be intended, there is no room  for  any  other  speech-act
than statements. ???? And, curiously, written  statements  are  not  genuine
speech-acts since they can only produce understanding,  an  internal  state.
(The reason  for this, as we shall see, is that  the  notion  of  statements
used by Searle comes from the philosophical  tradition  where  knowledge  is
understood as the "silent  speech"  of  the  thinker,  not  from  linguistic
orality).   In spoken language, however, as we shall also see, there  is  no
reason to distinguish statements from other speech  acts,  as  Searle  does,
for they also are linguistic acts and they too are  characterized  by  their
perlocutionary effects. By contrast, statements (or,  rather,  propositions)
have been privileged in the philosophical  and  in  certain  theological  or
even religious circles (cf. Aristotle and St  Thomas  in  Peri  hermeneias).
Statements are privileged because, on the  one  hand,  supposedly  they  are
truth-containing and therefore truth-claiming  linguistic  pieces,  and  the
only truth-claiming ones, and because, on the  other  hand,  orthopraxis  is
deemed to depend on (grounded) orthodoxia which is expressed in  statements.
Didn't Plato make philosophers into kings of the well-ordered  city  because
of their intuitive contemplation of  the  eternal  Forms,  which  guaranteed
their orhopraxis as merely mechanical application?
      Now the philosophical conception of language, that is  the  conception
of language that has prevailed in the philosophical  tradition  espoused  by
Searle is possible and  even  persuasive  once  written  language  has  been
separated from spoken language, and once statements have  been  singled  out
because of their supposed truth-claiming characteristic, and once they  have
been reduced to propositions to be grounded. Before  that  occurs,  however,
that is, before the separation of  written  from  spoken  language  and  the
consecration  of  the  latter  as  the  linguistic  model,   all   this   is
inconceivable and totally unpersuasive, as we shall see now.
Written language as the model in Searle's theory of language
       The  speech-acts  theory  arose  as  an  alternative  to  the   Greek
conception of language. Searle  mixed  the  two,  and  ultimately  gave  the
primacy to the latter by keeping the Greek  pictorial  view  of  speculative
knowlede, as reflected in his treatment of statements as exceptional speech-
acts.
       While  explicitly  relating  his  view  of   ordinary   language   as
constituted by speech-acts to Strawson, Searle is unconsciously but  heavily
indebted to the Greek  view  of  KNOWLEDGE,  which  is   based  on  written,
objectified language, where speech-acts are not acts  for  they  produce  no
perlocutionary effects. Accordingly, he thinks that the  essential  function
of language is to communicate a meaning to be understood, and that  being  a
competent user of language  is  being  habitually  capable  of  sending  and
receiving such meaningful,  that  is,  intelligible  messages.  Language  is
language because it says what it (or the speaker) means,  and  by  so  doing
language is communicative, for what  is  meant  can  be  decoded.  Certainly
other effects often accompany the  use  of  language--speech-acts  theorists
call them perlocutionary effects--and are intended or meant,  so  that  they
too are genuinely linguistic effects, locutionary  effects.  These  effects,
hoever, are not essential in the way in which  their  being  understood  is.
And this for several reasons. First, these  perlocutionary  effects  can  be
obtained also by non-linguistic means, whereas the intrinsic  or  essential,
the illocutionary effect of language,  cannot  be  produced  otherwise  than
linguistically.   Secondly,   unlike   the   illocutionary    effect,    the
perlocutionary effects do not  always  obtain  when  communication  actually
occurs. Thirdly, perlocutionary effects are not intended in  every  case  of
linguistic communication, whereas the illocutionary effect  necessarily  is.
Such is the case, for instance, with statements.
A summary of Searle's theory of speech-acts
      Searle devotes special attention to statements. According to him,  the
statement "The hammer is on the table" being a linguistic act, "says,"  that
is, expresses linguistically the  speaker's  honest  or  sincere  conviction
(honest in the paradigmatic case) that the hammer is on the  table,  and  is
meant to produce in the hearer the  understanding  (though  not  necessarily
the belief) that the hammer is on the table.
       In  this  regard  to  their  being  understood,  statements  are   no
exception. Indeed, understanding what is said is the primary  and  essential
effect of all speech-acts, statements included. What the words say  is  what
the  speech-act  means  to  communicate,  and  this  is  what  it   actually
communicates when what is said is understood. All speech-acts, by virtue  of
the meaning of the words said, intend to convey a message to be  understood,
and they succeed as  linguistic acts if that message is  understood.  Searle
calls  this  essential  linguistic  effect  the  "illocutionary  effect"  of
language.
       In addition, however, to  the  illocutionary  effect  common  to  all
speech-acts, other effects may be  intended  by  the  speaker  and  achieved
through language, and are actually intended in  the  case  of  most  speech-
acts. These are, therefore, genuinely linguistic effects,  too,  locutionary
effects. Insofar, however, as these effects are not mere  understanding  but
something other, they are  not  essential  for  the  success  of  linguistic
communication  which  is  succesfully  achieved  when  what   is   said   is
understood.
       To  distinguish  these  additional  effects   from   the   essential,
illocutionary  effect,  while  marking  at  the  same  time  their   genuine
linguistic character, Searle calls them perlocutionary  effects.  Thus,  for
example, when I give an order to John, I intend for him to  obey  my  order.
However,  my  speech-act  is  fully  successful  as  a  speech-act  if  John
understands the order I give him, even if  he  doesnt'  obey  it.  In  other
words, his obeying it is not essential for the success of the speech-act  as
a speech-act. It is a perlocutionary effect, an effect in  addition  to  the
essential or illocutionary effect, which  in  all  cases  consists  in  mere
understanding.
      Now, the perlocutionary force of a locution is clear, or  can  at  any
rate (and ideally should) be made clear, by the words  themselves,  by  what
is said. For instance, if I say "I beg you," it is clear that I  intend  you
to freely and without obligation give me what I beg for (where, needless  to
say, giving is a perlocutionary effect, for it is  an  action,  not  a  mere
understanding). Again, if I say "I command you," it is clear  by  virtue  of
the words said that I intend you to obey my  order  in  recognition  of  the
authority I have on you (where, again,  your  obeying  is  a  perlocutionary
effect for it is an action, not a mere understanding). In  this  connection,
however, statements are exceptional in  that  they  have  no  perlocutionary
force  and,  therefore,  neither  produce  nor  are  meant  to   produce   a
perlocutionary  effect.  Hence  a  statement  can  be  deemed  to  be  fully
successful by being merely understood, since no other effect is intended  by
virtue of its meaning. Whether or not  the  case  is  the  same  with  other
speech-acts which intend perlocutionary effects may be  disputable.  Indeed,
can a command which is not obeyed  by  the  commandee  be  considered  fully
successful? Searle answers this question affirmatively, on  the  basis  that
the essential linguistic effect of  all  speech-acts  is  being  understood,
whereas the perlocutionary effects are  not  essential.  TO  THIS  IMPORTANT
POINT WE SHALL RETURN LATER.
       As  we  just  saw,  Searle  maintains  that  statements   intend   no
perlocutionary effect.*
* In this connection,  he  examines  the  hypothesis  that  the  distinctive
(perlocutionary?) specific effect of statements is to  be  believed  by  the
addressee or addressees,  opn  the  ajrgument  that  the  intention  of  the
speaker is that what is stated be accepted  as  true.  In  other  words,  in
addition to their being understood, the typical and  distinctive  effect  of
statements, at least of categorical or unconditional  statements,  is  their
being believed by the addresse, for they involve  the  implicit  claim  that
what is stated is conform to reality. Searle, however, denies this, for  the
speaker who makes a statement does not always and necessarily  intend  theat
what is stated be believed. For instance, if in a discussion I state to  you
who are an atheist "God  exists,"  I  necessarily  have  the  intention,  by
virtue of the meaning of my words, that you understand what I said,  namely,
that God exists, but I may well have no intention, under the  circumstances,
of your believing what I state.
      Let me condense Searle's view on statements. A statement is a  speech-
act that, by virtue of the meaning of the words by  which  it  is  composed,
intends exclusively to produce understanding and  nothing  else.  In  short,
unlike all or most other speech acts,  statements  have  no  "perlocutionary
force" by virtue  of  their  meaning.  The  fact  that  statements  have  no
characteristic perlocutionary effect should not be construed  as  a  denial,
on Searle's part, of the fact that statements are susceptible of  truth  and
falsity. Actually, statements are the only speech-acts that can be  true  or
false, for they are the only linguistic forms whose relationship to  reality
is of the kind "mind-to-reality-fit" rather than "reality-to-mind-fit."
      Such is Searle's view of language couched  in  terms  of  speech-acts.
But is that view persuasive? Is it not based on the reduction of  spoken  to
written language?
On the primacy of spoken language
      We all are orally initiated into language, and this  through  practice
rather than being formally taught. Reading comes later, when it comes,  when
one is already a competent user of spoken  language.  Furethermore,  written
language is parasitic on  the  possession  of  oral  language  in  that  its
acquisition presupposes the  possession  of  spoken  language.  This  is  an
important point missed completely by the Greek seekers of wisdom  from  whom
Searle inherits his epistemological views on statements.
      The fact that we are introduced to oral language in  the  first  place
is not an accident. Indeed, it is not simply that in all  languages  orality
happens to precede written language (and that in some  cases  the  stage  of
written language is never reached), as if the  reverse  could  have  equally
happened. The fact is that spoken and written language do  not  function  in
the same way at all, and that the way in which  written  language  functions
radically prevents it from being  the  version  of  language  through  which
people can be initiated into language. The  reason  for  this  is  that  the
understanding typically involved in  reading,  which  Searle  considers  the
essential lingusitic effect, is purely private to the reader, in that it  is
not  connected   with   observable   behavior   related   to   the   meaning
linguistically comunicated. WHEREAS THE PRACTICAL UNDERSTANDING  TYPICAL  OF
ORAL LANGUAGE IS A CONDUCT INFORMEKD BY THAT UNDERSTANDING,  ASSUMNING  THAT
AN UNDERSTANDING THAT CONSISTS IN A PRACTICAL INTENTION RATHER  THAN  IN  AN
ASSENTUFUL GRASP CAN BE CALLED AN UNDERSTANDING WITHLUT EQUIVOCATING.
      When one reads a text one is not, typically, in the presence of the
writer as one is in the presence of the speaker or speakers in the case of
spoken language, one is not involved in linguistic interaction with them,
one is not addressed individually, one is not expected to act-in-response
when addressed, and one does not observe others who are addressed and
respond both orally and behaviorally. In this case, the primary appropriate
response to a written text is (as Searle wrongly claims for all language,
spoken included) mere understanding of the meaning expressed through the
wrods. Furthermore, in reading, if any other responses or effects are
connected with the meaning expressed--such as agreeing or disagreeing,
liking or disliking, being moved or not, etc.--these have no typical
behavioral manifestations. Consequently, these effects or responses are
unobservable, so that by looking at the reader I couldn't possible know
from his or her reactions whether or not he or she understood the text, and
whether my understanding of the text is the same as his or hers and
actually is the one intended by the writer. In addition, in the case of
written language the effects which are not mere understanding are
accidental, in that they may or may not be intended by the speaker, are not
constitutive of the meaning of itself of the text, and may therefore not
occur without the success of the communication expressed in the words
("Whatever can be meant can be said") being impaired.
       One learns how to read by grasping the correspondence between
letters and previously familiar meaningful sounds, or between images and
sounds in the case of pictorial languages. In the case of spoken language
one learns connotation and denotation (meaning and reference) through
actual experience of particular denotations and conotations, as Helen
Keller did, for the essence of orality is not auditive sounds but practical
meaning-reference for which one can be positively or negatively reinforced
and observe others being positively and negatively reinforced. Bu contrast,
in the case of understanding the meaning involved in reading there is
nothing one can observe in other readers that relates to the meaning of
what they read. Moreover, one cannot be directed or expected by the readers
to do anything in relation to that meaning, since there is no particular
observable conduct to which that meaning is related. Spoken language,
however (at least on the most fundamental linguistic level, which is the
level of practical, survival-related interaction with the surrounding world
rather than of mere conversation, as illustrated by Helen Keller's case) is
essentially connected with conduct on the addressee's part--behavioral,
linguistic, or both.
      The first communications with the child are practical. "Come here,"
addressed to the child, is expected to be met with a certain behavioral
response on the child's part. "Come here," addressed to somebody else in
the child's presence, is met by a a certain behavioral response on the
addressee's part. If no behavior were meant to happen in response to those
words (a behavior to whose presence or absence rewards and punishments are
atached), or if such behavior never happened in response, the expression
"Come here" would remain forever strictly meaningless for the child, and
for the speaker too, who would therefore never give such an order.
      This example shows an important thing, namely, that the meaning of a
command is not something to be understood, in the sense given to this term
by Searle, which has a purely theoretical conotation, but a certain
performance on the addressee's part, a certain behavioral, observable
conduct in response, which is in response because it is informed by the
intention to respond. This performance-in-response-to-the-particular-
command is what the "Come here" addressed to the child means, for this is
what the speaker intends to obtain through the communication, this is what
the child understands practically by obeying, and this is what satisfies
the speaker who gives the command (without whose satisfaction certain other
unsavory behavioral responses on his or her part would follow).
      In other cases, though, the conduct expected or required of the
addressee is not directly related to the desirous or fearful speaker but
refers to objects in the surrounding world of the exposed, vulnerable
addressee. "Drink your milk." This presupposes, in part, and in part
enlarges, the scope of denotation or reference to the object milk and of
its connotation or concept. Progressively the child grasps practically that
the objects denoted are not only denoted in reference to the addresser or
the addressee but also in reference to others, and not only denoted in
terms of the desires and fears of the addresser or the addressee and even
of others but also objectively, that is, independently of their capacity to
satisfy or dissatisfy the addressee's or anybody's desires. In this way the
child begins to learn the surrounding world in relation to him or her and
to others, and the ways in which he or she is expected to behave and the
roles he or she is expected to play.
      Gradually the child learns that the world is no only for him or her
but also for others, and that the world is not only to be measured in terms
of his or her desires or fears but also in terms of those of others, and
that he is part and parcel of the world for others and exposed to their
linguistic and other action, as others are part and pracel of the world for
him and exposed to his linguistic and other action, and that the world can
be manipulated to an extent to fit his or her desires or those of others,
and that this manipulation has limits imposed by the 'nature' of that which
is to be manipulated. In this way the 'objective' or not directly related
to desire and fear gradually emerges or fully amenable to it.
      This connects with the Serlean notion of statements, which are
supposed to be purely factual, informational, objective, without reference
to exposed subjects, and even without perspectival ties to spatially and
temporally situated subjects. (The reference here is to something merely
understood, to an object identical with the concept, not to object for
response for vulnerable agents). Such seems to be the character attributed
within the Greek tradition, of which Searle's position is a variety, to the
predicating or propositional pieces of language, which happen to be truth-
claiming by virtue of their pictorial quality.
      That tradition, however, arises not from the agent's experience of
being addressed and addressing in the practical context, which is the
originary linguistic contextual practice on which all other uses of
language are parasitic, but is based on an explicit THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
built to explain truth and falsity (of judgments and statements) and on
that basis to guarantee, if possible, the attainment of truth.
      According to that theory, originally developped in Greece by the so-
called lovers of wisdom or knowledge, knowledge consists in the
reflectively known, guaranteed, intentional or cognitive conformity of the
knower (through knowing acts) to the real. Knowing acts are those acts,
such as perception,, understanding, judging, stating, that are capable of
intentional conformity to the real and which, through their actual
conformity, produce actual knowledge--information--in the subject.
The unsolvable problem of truth-conformity
      What characterizes all those "epistemic theories" whose origins are
to be traced to Greece is that, in all of them, knowledge consists in some
kind of actual conformity between the knower and the real, which thereby
becomes actually known, and that this conformity is attained through the
cognitive or intentional contact between the knower and the real. The
unsolvable problem that view meets is the impossibility of guaranteeing the
difference between opinion and knowledge, between believing that one knows
and actually knowing, between the subjective feeling of certainty and
objective or fully justified certainty of conformity to reality (cf. Kant's
definition of faith above).
      The Aristotelians took for a solution the immediately self-justifying
character of the "principles" [(contradiction, sufficient reason, partes et
totum... (?)] by virtue of their intuitive absolute indubitability, and the
subordinate indubitatibilty of the intellectual knowledge of the natures of
actually existing realities either themselves directly accessible to
perception or indirectly through their effects. This solution, however--
given the unavoidable dependence of the knowledge of the intelligible and
necessary on the knowledge of the sensible and contingent (Nihil est in
intellectu quod prius non fuerit in sensu)--left open the thorny question
of the validity of the knowledge of the purely factual by contrast to the
necessary, which of course involves also the issue of the knowledge of
existence.
      The problem of objective certainty became even more acute with the
Cartesian separation between the subject and the object. How, indeed, can
this subject separated from the object ever come to know for sure that the
knowledge in the mind actually conforms to the reality supposedly known?
Descartes' attempt to solve the problem by the indubitability of the clear
and distinct idea obviously failed. That led Kant, in reaction to Hume's
well-argued skepticism, to his so insatisfactory solution. Through his
"Copernican revolution" which suppressed radically the anciennt issue of
objective conformity to extra-mental reality, transformed the notion of
truth from conformity to actual (intentional?) identity. At  the same time,
it reduced the field of the knowable, leaving to faith the grasp of God, of
immortality, of freedom (and of other subjects), and the whole field of the
practical and moral to a blind imperative.
      It is within this context of cognitive acts as capable of conformity
to the real, and of truth as actual conformity, that the idea of statements
as the only truth-claiming speech acts finds its place. Indeed, statements
(which express what is perceived, understood, or judged by the kniower)
supposedly are the only speech-acts susceptible of truth, that is, of
conformity to the real, for they are the only acts that involve predication-
-firm, unconditional predication in the case of categorical statements, and
affirmation. Needless to say, this again involves the old problem of truth,
which Searle attempts to solve rather insufficiently in his articles on
truth.*
      No wonder, given the long history of failure of this view of
knowledge and of truth, that the deconstructionists finally declared defeat
and made it into a triumphant principle. According to them, texts--that is,
linguistic pieces--particularly statements, refer. But they refer with
"différance," to use Derrida's vocabulary, never delivering in actual
presence that to which they refer. Hence all texts are no more than
interpretations, which can be substitued by other interpretations in
endless succession, wihout possible escape from the hermeneutic circle, the
circle of interpretive textuality. Too put it in another way, the
deconstructionists grant that statements and texts composed of both
statements and grounding statements that supply evidence for the stated are
the truth-claiming texts, but they deny that the truth they claim is
attainable.
      This long disquisition was necessary to render intelligible   my
position.
My disagreeements with Searle
      Having explained in some detail Searle's views on speech-acts in
general and on statements by contrast to other speech-acts in particular,
it is time I introduce my own views by contrast to his. Concerning, in the
first place, statements, I agree with Searle that statements are not, per
se, truth-claiming speech-acts, (though they are susceptible of truth and
falsity).. But not for the same reason. Indeed, he thinks that statements
are susceptible of truth and falsity, but he doesn't think that, as speech
acts, they have the prelocutionary force of claiming truth and, therefore,
of intending to obtain belief on the addressee's part. For my part, I
think, on the one hand, that statements are not truth-claiming speech acts,
because they are no more susceptible of truth and falsity, OF BEING OR NOT
BEING CONFORM TO REALITY, than any other speech-act. In other words, unlike
Searle, I don't think that statements are unique among speech acts in that
they can be conform to reality, for the very notion of intentional or
epistemic conformity to reality is, in my opinion, monsensical. It arises
out of taking written language as the model, and therefore of understanding
inventing the notion of knowledge as contmeplation,  as theory. On the
other hand, I don't think, as Searle does, that statements are unique among
speech-acts in that they have no perlocutionary force, that is, that they
aim exclusively at being understood. On the contrary, like all other speech
acts, statements aim at eliciting a behavior from the addresee or
addressees.
      These differences between Searle and myself demand detailed
unpacking, for our positions represent radically divergent views on
lnaguage. Indeed, to put my position in a nutshell, I think that the
distinction between illocutionary and perlocutionary effects is
illegitimate.
      This Searlean distinction rests on the assumption that language is
something primarily to be understood, and that what in linguistic
communication exceeds understanding is based on understanding--a purely
mental entity independent of conduct, as conduct is a purely bodily entity
that sometimes accompanies linguistic understanding. Thus, one can
understand a command and fail to obey it, but one cannot obey a command
without first understanding it. This supposedly shows that the essential
effect of all linguistic action is understanding, for it is to be found in
all cases of successful linguistic communication; that this effect is
distinct and separable from the perlocutionary effects; that the
perlocutionary effects (though genuinely linguistic and intended or meant)
are  not essential to successful linguistic communication, for not all
speech-acts have perlocutionary force; and that the perlocutionary effects
are parasitic on the illocutionary effect.
      For my part, I think otherwise. Precisely because linguistic
communication is a form of agency--of interaction, more precisely--not a
mere exchange of speculative meanings, the achievement of the effect
intended--Searle's perlocutionary effect, though this name implies that
there are is such a thing as the illocutionary effect that differs from the
perlocutionary ones--is essential for successful communication. Concretely,
if I command you to pass me that book, the linguistic action succeds only
if you pass me that book in obedience to my command, for that is what I
intend or mean, not the mere understanding typical of written expository
predicative texts. The action of passing the book is linguistic, a genuine
"speech-=act," in that it is meant by the speaker to be performed in
response to the linguistic command and is actually performed by the
addresse in response to the linguistic command. (In Searle's view, there is
no difference between the understanding of someone who reads or overhears
an order, and the understanding of the oral addressee). If, to continue
with my example, you happened to pass me the book by chance, without
hearing or understanding my command and therefore not in obedience to my
command, the action would not be the effect of a speech act and
consequently would not constitute a linguistic action. In other words, in
that case, though the action of passing the book obtains, the speech act
failed. And--in my view, by contrast to Searle's--the reason is not that
the adresse didn't understand, but that he did not perform the action meant
to be performed by him in response. [In Searle's view, whether or not the
action follows the understanding is linguistically irrelevant or
accidental, as long as the understanding that an order was given obtains.
But this indicates, precisely, that the action is not informed by the
practical understanding of the order, and thus that the action is not
really an act of obedience, anymore than the absence of the actionm is an
act of disobedience, a refusal of obedience, a linguistic response to me as
the speaker of the spoken, a practical denial of my authority.
      What I mean by "practical understanding" is very different from what
Searle means by "understanding." Searle means "understanding of what is
said," of what the words say or imply.
I mean an understanding that is incarnated in a conduct that corresponds to
the speaker's intention expressed linguistically.
      Let me elaborate the point. The understanding of which Searle speaks
is purely speculative. One understands a statement or a command exactly as
one understands the impersonal [speakerless, addresseeless) proposition
expressing a geometric theorem. That the understanding of which Searle
speaks is purely speculative shows in the fact that, according to him, in
the case of statements there is no perlocutionary effect meant to obtain,
and Searle doesn't see any diference between the (purely speculative)
understanding required for the success of the statement as a speech-act and
the understanding of the command. Actually, he reduces the understanding of
the command to the purely theoretical understanding of the statement. Well,
my position is exactly the opposite: I reduce the understanding of the
statement to the practical understanding of the command. Such understanding
is practical in that, like in the case of the command, it terminates in a
conduct-in-response, that is, in a conduct informed by the practical
understanding suscitated by the meaning of the speech act, which aims at
such conduct.
      That the understanding of which Searle speaks is purely speculative
shows in the case of other speekch-acts than statements. For instance, in
the case of a command, by its very perlocutionary force, an action is
involved. However, according to Searle, the action is not required for the
success of the speech act as such. The reason for this can only be that the
perlocutionary effect, the action, is meant to be understood
contemplatively, but is not meant to be performed.
      But isn't Searle's view queer? To speak of an avowedly different
order than the linguistic, Searle's position amounts to saying that when I
give a command (and a command is always definite) to my computer what I
intend is that the command be understood, not that it be carried out! (Of
course, I don't say to my computer "I command you to... Thus,  granted, it
is not a matter of linguistic communication but rather of cause effect. But
what is important in the example is the commander's intention, whether the
commander intends to be obeyed or simply to be understood). Searle sees the
understanding as different and independent from the action of passing me
the book, when I command that, for he sees the linguistic understanding
itself as purely speculative. By contrast to Searle, when I give the order
I mean the commanded action to be performed, not to be theoretically
understood. For me the understanding involved is practical, for I see in
the action in obedience to my command the genuine and genuinely linguistic
understanding of the command. I call this understanding practical because
it informs the action itself, so that the action is not a mere behavior but
an act of obedience, a genuinely linguistic action.
      Certainly, you, the addressee, may disobey my command, and you can
disobey it only if you understand my command. But whether you obey or
disobey you don't understand my command the way Sejarle thinks, neamely,
what I say. Your disobeying, your not doing what I commanded, is and
manifests a practical understanding, an action-in-response, not a mere
understanding of what I said, as Searle assumes, for it is a refusal to
obey incarnated in an action, the result of a decision not to do what I
commanded. Furthermore, disobedience is not the prototypical linguistic
case. In fact, Searle doesn't understand disobedience anymore than he
understands obedience, for he equates the understanding of all linguistic
acts, and of orders in particular, to the understanding of statements
which, according to him, are not linguistically related to any particular
conduct. Such understanding in which no conduct is involved is, for Searle,
the linguistic model. It is from the analysis of such a case that he draws
his distinction between illocutionary and perlocutionary effects and
determines the comparative essentialness of the illocutionary effect for
linguistic communication. In other words, he reduces statements to
communication of knowledge or  information about something, to be gained
through understanding of what is said. In a parallel way, he reduces other
speech-acts to communication of knowledge of, or information about, the
speaker's intentions or desires, a knowledge to be to be gained through
understanding of those intentions rather than through execution of the
intentions.
      Underlying this view is the Scholastic-Aristotelian idea of
(speculative) knowledge as language, what Plato calls "SILENT LANGUAGE"--
the language of predication, of the contemplator of the world and even of
his own acts. In this view, knowledge resides materially in perception or
in intellection conform to reality (hence animals 'know') but formally only
in reflective judgment which thanks to their linguistic ability people can
formulate to themselves through judgments and communicate to others through
statements. [THIS CONFLATION OF THE COGNITIVE ACTS (PERCEPTION,
UNDERSTANDING, JUDGMENT, STATEMENT) DETECTED BY AN OBJECTIFYING THEORY OF
KNOWLEDGE OR EPISTEMOLOGY IN SEARCH OF GUARANTEED TRUTH, WITH LANGUAGE
(FORMULATED AND EXPRESSED JUDGMENTS), TYPICAL OF THE GREEKS, IS AT THE
ROOTS OF THE WHOLE MESS.] What is communicated, according to Searle, is the
object known-formulated trough silent language by the speaker. And this
even in the case of the speaker's intentions, which supposedly are
themselves known-formulated and stated rather than actually intended.
      On the other hand, to return to my example, if you didn't pass me the
book because you didn't hear me, you wouldn't have disobeyed me. Now, how
does this case compare to the one in which you hear and understand but
refuse to obey me? Only the latter qualifies as disobedience. However, the
action is identical in both cases. How would Searle distinguish between the
two? He would say that disobedience presupposes understanding. But how
would Searle distinguish mere understanding from the action of non-
obedience?
                             ---------------
      There is no speech-act  in  the  practical,  interactive  domain  that
intends to be merely understood, or can be successful  as  a  speech-act  by
being merely  understood.  In  other  words,  all  speech  acts,  statements
included, intend something  other  than  being  understood  and,  therefore,
cannot be succesful as speech acts by merely being understood.
      [Searle has this wrongheaded view of language because he  thinks  that
words have an already conventional meaning--this is what he  argues  against
Grice--and that the speaker selects them  because  of  their  already  fixed
meaning to convey what he wants to convey to the hearer or addresse].
                             --------------------
      The view of statements as the truth-claiming  speech-acts  unavoidably
arises as soon as written language is taken  as  the  model  and   therefore
spoken language is assumed to follow that model. Actually,  however,  spoken
statements do not function, nor indeed are they  meant  by  the  speaker  to
function, as truth-claiming pieces in  the  sense  of  conveying  a  picture
(which may or may not be acurate)  of  realty,  of  the  surrounding  world,
rather than of the intentions of the speaker.
"YOUR MOTHER IS ON THE PHONE"-"FIRE!"-"THE HAMMER IS ON THE TABLE"
      The speaker always expects, and often intends,  a  conduct-in-response
to his or her statements (for the interactive speaker  communicates  to  the
interactive addresse an object for response to  be  transcended  practically
in a response), though the conduct (allghough forseen and  perhaps  intended
by the speaker) may sometimes be entirely left to the determination  of  the
addressee  (depending on circumstances). At any rate, mere understanding  is
never the successful (intended or even expected) achievement  of  statements
as linguistic or locutionary acts.
      Assuming this, what does follow?  That  language  is,  primarily,  the
language  of  exposure,  of  desirous-fearful-agents-patients  involved   in
interaction and who have sometimes or often to decide how  to  act.  If  so,
they don't speak the language of neutral description  and  their  statements
cannot  possess  the  truth-  correspondence  conceivable  in  the  case  of
objective  statements  on  the  basis  of  which  the  action  would  follow
mechanically--or, rather, no action would follow, for  a  non-exposed  agent
has no motivation to act. They speak the  language  of  already  culturally-
personally committed agents, but  whose  commitments  to  goals  are  to  an
extent free but not arbitrary, and which can change in time.
      Searle mixes two views of language: language as action, to  which  the
idea of perlocutionary effects is related, and  language  as  knowledge,  to
which the idea of understanding as the illocutionary effect is related.  The
former is connected  with  the  Greek  notion  of  practical  knowledge,  of
knowledge which consists in (appropriate) action, the latter with the  Greek
notion of speculative knowledge which consists in a  mental  or  intentional
entity assumed to  be  conform  to  reality.  The  former  arises  from  the
experience of speaking and being spoken to, that is,  from  oral  or  spoken
language, the latter from reflection on written, objectified language.
      On the one hand, his theory of speech-acts, as indicated by  its  very
name, corresponds to the notion of  communication  among  linguistic  agents
who speak and hear as vulnerable agents involved in interaction, who  intend
to modify the situation through linguistic  action.  Communication  involves
three terms: not mere subject and object,  as  'knowledge  supposedly  does,
but subject communicator, subject communicated, and what is communicated.
      On the other hand, his view of speech-acts defined by  their  capacity
to produce the illocutionary  effect  of  understanding,  of  statements  as
meant to produce only understanding and therefore  of  being  successful  as
speech-acts  if  understanding  is  achieved,  and   of   statements   being
susceptible  of  truth  corresponds  to  a  notion  of  communication  among
invulnerable, undesirous, objective contemplators-knowers,  and  of  reality
as  something  static  to  be  contemplated,  not  something  desirable   or
undesirable to be transformed through action. Here only knowing subject  and
known object are involved--just two terms.
      Spoken language establishes the relationship between the  speaker  and
the addressee as agents-patients in a shared  world,  a  world  shared  also
with  others,  which  is  prototypical  of  language  and  which   we   call
communication.

            TO BE CONTINUED WITH "\WP\98\98-APR-2"

