---
title: "98-FEB-1-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1998/98-FEB-1-1"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\98\98-feb-1

After Truth

" One reason for his [Wolterstorff's] pessimism [about foundationalism] is that the foundationalism he summarizes has to do with theories. This is in some ways unfortunate, as it suggests that the foundationalists (and thus St Thomas, if he is one) hold that whenever you hold something to be true on the basis of some foundation, you are in the realm of theory and science and the like. If I am asked why I think Austin Clifford McInerny is my father..., I can give reasons and I might even agree, though reluctantly, that I am building up a theory, but I would certainly draw the line at the suggestion that I am engaged in science. Unless 'science' is understood in its primary and unpretentious sense as knowledge of whatever kind. - Understood as scientia , the kind of knowledge that is gained as a result of apodictic syllogism..." (Ralph McInerny, "Analogy and Foundationalism in Thomas Aquinas," Pp-. 281-282).

"By fideism I mean the claim that nothing we know counts

for or against the truths of faith" (Ibid., p.84).

" Thomas uses what he takes to be the Pauline conception of the praeambula fidei in an argument on behalf of the reasonableness of faith. If some of the things that have been revealed can be known to be true, it is reasonable to say that the rest are in themselves intelligible. This is what is meant by the denial of fideism. Some things that we know count on behalf of the truth of what we believe; nothing we or anyone else knows could establish the falsity of what we believe " (Ibid. p. 286).

"... evidentialism--the view that, unless one has adequate evidence for one's theistic beliefs, it is rationally improper to hold them...  - Regardless of which way the principle actually cuts, I want to observe that it has been adopted by Christians and non-Chistians alike... The principle is not without its detractors, however. One thinks immediately of W. James' assurances that it is proper to exercise the 'will to believe'... Plantinga has raised a few eyebrows with his contention that belief in God, by which he means belief that there is a God, can be rational and yet not be based on evidence of any other beliefs. It can be a basic belief" (Kenneth Kondyndyk, "Faith and Evidentialism," p. 83).

"Turning to the evidentialist principle, I distinguish and consider a number of versions, showing that the nature of faith is incompatible with the bolder versions of this principle. Yet neither Aquinas nor Calvin thought that it was noetically improper or irrational to be a Christian believer without the sort of evidence typically demanded nowadays of 'rational belief' " (Ibid., p. 84).

(All the above articles are found in Rationality, Religious Belief and Moral Commitment: New Essays in the Philosophy of Religion , Edited by Robert Audi and William J. Wainwright , Cornell University Press, Ithaca and London, 1986).

"In The Nature of Doctrine , Lindbeck uses the word 'truth' in three explicitly distinguished senses: he speaks of categorial truth, intrasystematic truth, and ontological truth" (Bruce D. Marshall, "Aquinas as Postliberal Theologian" ( The Thomist , 1989, p. 357).

"On the lips of the skull cleaving crusader, Lindbeck argues, 'Christus est Dominus' is precisely not an ontologically true proposition from which the crusader draws inappropriate practical conclusions. This is one of the primary differences between his own account of religious truth and the views he labels 'propositionalist". In agreement with the maistream of modern Anglo-merican philosophy (especially under the influence of Wittgenstein), Lindbeck holds that the meaning of a term must be ascertained by the way it is used, which requires attention to what Lindbeck calls "the total relevant context," practical as well as lisnguistic. The propositionalist fails to note the importance of practice for meaning, especially in religion, and so makes the misleading decision that the crusader's cry is ontologicallly true. Lindbeck's account of intrasystematic truth is designed to avoid this problem. But linguistic and practical coherence are not barriers to ontological truth; by establishing when utterances have appropriate meanings, they are conditions for it. " (Ibid., p. 365).

" Categorial and intrasystematic truth are the necessary and sufficient conditions of ontological truth . Lindbeck is quite clear about this. ' An intrasystematically true statement is ontologically false--or, more accurately, meaningless-- if it is part of a system that lacks the concepts or categories to refer to the relevant realities, but it is ontologically true if it is part of a system that is itself categoricaly true (adequate). If the Christian categories are true and they are used in a way which coheres with the linguistic and practical paradigms of the religion, the sentence thereby uttered succeeds in referring to and describing that which is in fact the most important thing in the universe--the God who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ ( however inadequate and merely analogical the description may be to its transcendental referent ). The proposition thus expressed engenders a genuine adequatio mentis ad rem , what Lindbeck calls a 'mental isomorphism of the knowing and the known,' which is no less real for being 'part and parcel of a wider [ practical] conformity of the self to God" (Ibid. pp. 366-7).

"Thomas Aquinas also maintains that utterances of  Christian belief are ontologically true only if they cohere with specific linguistic and practical paradigms internal to the religion itself, and indeed this coherence is an adequate justification of their ontological truth" (Ibid. p, 356).

The question .

What are we left with after the disappearance of truth? Can we live without truth, or at least without the illusion of truth? Is skepticism in order? If not, what? That is the question.

Truth was a notion that had a place within an epistemological contemplative paradigm which was never quite satisfactory but whose day is over now. Even Kant, who saw himself as a revolutionary, left the paradigm intact; his Copernican revolution just inverted the terms.

The disappearance of truth doesn't entail that everything goes either in the domain of speaking or in the domain of acting--the two are intimately related--as shown by the case of the inverting lenses. The reason that not everyting goes is that we (each of us, that is) are irremediably involved in interaction as agents who have desires and fears, a temporal space of expectations before us and a temporal space of memories behind us, and who are condemned to have goals and make decisions. Practical convictions , then, about oneself as an agent and about the world are both unavoidable and necessary. Indeed, if one had no definite expectations about oneself and the world, then purposive, intentional action would be impossible. But we do in fact, though not always and all the time, act purposively and intentionally.

Being linguistic agents, our general practical convictions , unlike those of animals, are to a large extent linguistically absorbed from our culture (our matrix community's sedimented experience) and then modified on the basis of our personal experience and reflection on it, as well as on the basis of our constant linguistic interaction with our culture and with others who reflect on their experience. *

* These practical convictions, however, even when reflected upon and formulated, are practical and meant to remain practical, that is, they are meant to inform our action, not to become theoretical or contemplative through objectification. When the latter happens, that is, when our formulated convictions are taken for true, that is, for pictures corresponding to reality, then the unitary and totalitarian notion of reality as something to be known-contemplated--"the truth is one"--arises. And with it, in time, the philosophical tradition with all its vices].

Obviously, the bulk of our practical convictions is deeply sedimented and more or less unconscious, or at least not verbally formulated. But many of our practical convictions, and certainly at least the most basic of them, are susceptible of verbal formulation. The Christian Credo is a case in point. * This is what reflection achieves: it makes explicit the most basic convictions that inform our actions and that should inform our future deliberations. It goes without saying that people whose basic convictions differ will act differently.   

* Notice, however that the Credo doesn't express general convictions, much less general theoretical convictions, about God as a reality. It is a characterization of the Trinitarian God as respondendus , as finis ultimus.

What happens when both they and we state our convictions? Our disagreement becomes evident in our different and mutually contradictory statements. Let us not forget, however, that, since our convictions are not meant as pictures but as guides or 'forms' of action, our disagrements are going to be manifested in our respective actions, if they are genuine disagreements. At least in this regard the pragmatists had the right intuition: a conviction that makes no difference in the character (or dispositions to act) of the people who hold it as well as in their actions is no genuine conviction.

When disagreement is manifested in statements, though, the temptation to objectify arises, and with it the hope to settle the disagreement 'rationally' by taking a fresh look at what is the case, or at the reasons for stating what is the case. Evidentialism and foundationalism, which never worked, tend to reappear. Such avenue, however, is a waste of time. It belongs in the hopeless contemplative paradigm.

But then what? Are my convictions neither true nor false? Aren't my convictions truer than those of the person who disagrees with me? Well, if by true we mean visual or contemplative correspondence with reality, no, they are not, for there is no reality-picture. Convictions are neither true nor false in that sense, and trying to prove that my convictions are true and the other's false is a vain enterprise that sends us back to evidentialism and foundationalism. If we are to keep the idioms "true" and "false," they are a by-product and a function of what an agent sees as appropriate or inappropriate goal-oriented action. God, for instance, is to be responded to as lovable by loving Him and keeping his commandments; this is the genuine acknowledgment of his reality, not theoretical assent to any statements, even to the statements of the Creed.

My position differs from Lindbeck's in that I frankly deny ontological truth, included the ontological truth of the articles of faith as expressed in the Credo. Of course, this move of mine is highly ekxposed to the danger of being misunderstood, in that it seems to imply that God the Father, the Son, and Holy Spirit are not real, that the God of Christianity doesn't exist. *

*  What I deny is the ontological pricture of reality, within which God is one of the beings represented. Real, in my sense, is what is to be responded to by an agent who himnself or hgerself is to be responded to by other agents.

My answer is twofold. (1) Lindbekck, too, should deny ontological truth, since he makes truth intrasystematic. This means, as David Tracy and others have rightly objected, that the Christian God's ontological truth is not objective and universal, and therefore not real ontological truth. Lindbeck should accept that consequence, as I do. If he doesn't, it is either because he wants to be diplomatic and not risk a controversy that would make him appear as a radical heretic or an atheist, or because as a theologian he is more interested in the Christian logia --think of theo-logia--than in the Christian practice, or because he himself has not quite escaped the contemplative paradigm. (2) Lindbeck and I, or I at any rate, have to explain persuasively that the denial of ontological truth doesn't imply and cannot be equated either with God's non-existence or with assent to the proposition that God doesn't exist.  

The denial of ontological truth

Animals are non-linguistic, even the locomotive ones which act in a not merely reflex but intentional or goal-directed way and which learn through experience. Their goals, however, are in no way chosen by them, for they are natural to them. It seems that for

choosing goals language is required, for it creates the necessary distance between the object for response as presented for immediate response and the object for response as chosen for response. Furthermore, language is social, not solitary. Through the language of our culture, which involves the practice or typical responses of our culture that accompany the linguistic utterances, we learn our initial responses and receive our initial cultural goals. But we are exposed to other cultures and sub-cultures, especially in the modern world, and we interact linguistically with their members. It is at this point that our disagreements become visible. Others respond to the 'same' stated objects in a different way (disagreement on 'values'), or even state different objects (disagreement on facts). When it comes to that we discuss statements, particularly statements of fact. For while we are forced to grant that "values are in the eyes of the beholder," we cannot bring ourselves to acknowledge that facts, too, are in the eyes of the beholder, for we don't realize that there is no such a thing as neutral facts, but only practical relations of encounter.'Facts' 'exist' only insofar as they are to be responded to and are actually responded to, which is to say that there is no such a thing as what we ordinarily call facts. We think of facts as objectively out there, composing the whole of reality, and of statements, which express the beliefs of the speaker, as re-presenting or corresponding to the real facts. In other words, the separation of facts and values, of seeing and feeling, of theory and practice appears as natural and is taken for granted, integrated as it is in the epistemological paradigm of knowledge as the mirror of nature. And when we give up this paradigm--as we are increasingly doing today--we are left with nothing, with pure skepticism, for we unwittingly continue to judge by the very ontological categories we claim to have abandoned. Caputo's position may be a case in point.

An allusion to Caputo's deconstructionism

Just an allusion, for I will not develop fully my point here.

In "Faith within the limits of Caputo's deconstructionism" I found his faith, as it emerges from his treatment of it in Against Ethics , wanting. The reason is his minimalism which prevents him from following Levinas in the latter's finding in obligation a possible trace of God rather than a mere es gibt obligation. If so, I argued,, his minimalism will by the same token force him to dismiss as maximalist  the reading of the abyss that "construes sit in tekrms of the traces and stirrings of a loving hand" rather than as mere abyss and nothing more. Und nichts ausserdem!

It seems to me that Caputo continues to have a contemplative view of language as corresponding to reality. Es gibt obligation--the very expression suggests this, though of course obligation is less 'objective' than Caputo in es gibt Caputo. Language refers to what ius,s to what es gibt, but doens't capture it in presence, but only "almost." Secondly, Caputo doesn't realize that, aside from the fact that language is practical, applicative (and consequently reference is applicative too), the fact that we function within one particular language doesn't prevkent us from using language meaningfullu but, on the contrary, makes that possible. I am therefore entitled, by my very participation in the Christian linguistic ommunity, to recite believingly-practically the Catholic Credo, and to use my Christian language in my practice and in my relations with other Christians who share the faith with me. The fact that other interpretations are possible, and that my statements don't carry or don't prompt practical response beyond   the limits of the community of faith is not a reason not to use belivingly-practically a full-fledged language instead of reducing myself to such primitive half-statements (theoretical) as es gibt obligation. Thirdly, Caputo's Nietzschean temptations show that he is an individualist, as if our language were not learned from and in a community of practice.   
