---
title: "92JUL-2"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/2005/92JUL-2"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.0
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\chantill\july92-2                     July 9, 1992

Human actions are not only in need of explanation

but also of justification. I raped because I

had a strong urge is a good explanation, not a

justification.

Par où commencer?

Aquinas's model for theology as a science--that is, for the activity of theologizing and for its formulated result--was Aristotelian science as episteme, not as phronesis.

Aris himself came to realize that such a model could not work in ethics and, therefore, that ethics, even in the special way in which he conceived of it (not to say anything of the ethics of the agent), could not be a science in the strict sense--episteme--, only a "wisdom." Could not the same be the case for theology?

In order to make this case I would have to show the structural similarity between ethics and theology (faith?), which lies, I think, in the inseparability of knowledge from desire or, rather, in their identity in another kind of act which is neither intellectual nor voluntary or passional but something else.

However, to show this persuasively I have to render perspicuous the fact that the Greek's start was wrongheaded. Its wrongheadedness lies in that they understood knowledge on the basis of the contemplator's model (what philosophers were doing when they reflected), not on the basis of the exposed agent's model.

This, in its turn, opens the way to a new comprehension of philosophy and theology that forbids such practices as attempting to prove or disprove God's existence or to consider faith as irrational on such basis. It is here, I think, that the issue of stories, history and sacred history enters.

Given that this is the project, the question is how to realize it in a manageable, economic way?  

My first attempt will be to clarify why ethics as a science

is impossible. In this regard, Nussbaum may be helpful. She contrasts Aris with Plato on the 'science of the good' and shows that in this matter there is a double necessary anthropomorphism (see The Fragility of Goodness , p. 291 and whole chapter 10, especially the last two sections that have to do with emotions and passions).

 
