---
title: "94-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/94-1.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


\wp\chant\94-1-lang                          January 27, 94
                       Reflective Language
                 "There is a further reason why speech  act  theory  has  so
little to say about declaratives, beyond its  over-simple  contrast  between
words and world. Speech act theory assumes that all illocutionary acts  must
be  propositional,  that  inferences,  for  example,  might   contain   some
illocutionary acts, but cannot be illocutionary acts because they cannot  be
captured in a proposition... no argument is  ever  presented  for  insisting
that all illocutionary acts be attached to propositions,  and  my  guess  is
that the assumption is simply a survival  of  the  theory  of  language,  in
which the function of language was to state true propositions,  that  speech
act theory seeks to overthrow.
                 "Further proof  that  it  is  no  minor  flaw  in  Searle's
analysis that he does not know what to do with declaratives comes  from  any
consideration of language not based on the  presupposition  that  there  are
simple uses of language called constatives, such  that  other  thigs  we  do
with words are deviations from the basic use, telling the  truth.  Foucault,
for example, finds  this  "ambiguous  direction  of  fit"  inherent  in  any
serious discourse... "a  discourse  attempting  to  be  both  empirical  and
critical cannot but be  both  positivist  and  eschatological;  man  appears
wsithin  it  as  a  truth  both  reduced  and  promised"   (Eugene   Garver,
"Aristotle's Rhetoric as a Work of  Philosophy,"  Philosophy  and  Rhetoric,
vol. 19 No. 1, 1986, p. 22, note 8).
      And Garver also says in the article:
      "... rhetoric, while containing assertives, cannot itself be an act of
      assertion. If rhetoric were an assertive, then the distinction between
      proof and other inducements wouldn't be so problematic. Assertives are
      appropriate  exactly  where  rhetoric  is  a  second  best  method  of
      persuading people of an  independently  ascertainable  truth.  On  the
      other hand, that does not
      mean that some decisions are not better than others; just because  the
      direction of fit is not obviously words to world, it does  not  follow
      that all decisions are arbitrary.  If  rhetorical  persuasion  were  a
      directive, then proof would not be superior to emotional appeals.  The
      performative nature of promises and commands may, as in  Searle,  make
      them automatically successful and so put them beyond criticism (except
      to the degree they can misfire [proven factually wrong; see  later  in
      the article]), but arguments are neither automatically successful  nor
      beyond criticism. Persuading is an  act  of  discourse  in  which  the
      successful act is constitutive of what follows--the  fit  is  word  to
      world--as persuasion defines what decision is  best,  but  it  is  not
      arbitrarily constitutive--the direction of fit is world to word too.
      "Searle is aware of illocutionary acts with both  directions  of  fit,
      and calls them declaratives:  ...  'Declarations  do  attempt  to  get
      language to match the world. But they do not attempt to do  it  either
      by describing an existing state of affairs (as do assertives)  nor  by
      trying to get someone to bring about a future state of faffairs (as do
      directives and commissives.') But Searle does not  have  much  to  say
      about this 'very peculiar relation,' 'bringing about a fit by its very
      successful performance'. Speech act theory began with the  distinction
      between performatives and constatives, and  its  early  examples  look
      very much like Searle's assertives and commissives and directives; the
      original distinction proved unstable  just  because  it  ignored  this
      ambiguous class with its very peculiar  relation.  But  the  more  one
      looks at illocutionary acts, the greater the proportion of  them  that
      seem to fit this middle class instead of the two  pure  directions  of
      fit, and the more important that middle class apears.
      "Hence it is no minor flaw in Searle's treatment that  he  cannot  say
      much about declaratives.  All  he  can  do  is  show  their  place  in
      institutional settings, showing how they function to bring disputes to
      a close, but he had nothing to say about the kind of illocutionary act
      they are because the distinction between world and word is  too  crude
      to capture their nature. The world is  either  a  set  of  determinate
      facts, what is the case, waiting to be stated  in  true  propositions,
      and then the function of speech acts  must  be  to  state  truly  what
      things are; or the world is indeterminate, and  then  the  speaker  is
      free to make it into anything he likes, fitting  world  to  word.  But
      declaratives, and, I shall show, rhetorical proofs, do neither...  One
      could equally take the moral of Austin's  work  as  an  invitation  to
      reflect on our ordinary distinction between world and word--since  the
      distinction between performative and referential  language  dissolves,
      one should be open to more complicated relations   between  world  and
      word..." (Ibid. pp. 12-14).
      There is a distinction between "saying that..."  and  "communicating,"
and between "solitary language" and "communicative  language,"  and  between
"oral language" and "written language." And  there  are  specific  relations
beween the members of each of the  pairs:  saying,  solitary  language,  and
written  language  go  together,  on  the  one  hand,   and   communicating,
communicative language, and oral language go together, on the other hand.
      My interest in these  distinctions  as  well  as  in  the  privileged,
primary place accorded to  propositional  speech  acts  and  to  constatives
(saying   something   said)   arises   from   the   conviction   that    the
representational theory of language and  the  primacy  of  saying  originate
from, or at least  in  connection  with,  the  reflective  or  observational
(rather than witnessing-participating language of exposed  agents)  language
of philosophers and their preoccupation not only with truth but  with  truth
as   fidelity  of  the  representation  to  the  represented   reality.   To
complicate matters, representation is a visual  metaphor,  with  the  result
that only what is either literally or metaphorically visible can qualify  as
real and object of truth, with the consequent devaluation of  the  emotional
both in  the knowing agent and in the known.

