---
title: "92-JUL-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/92-JUL-1.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


\wp\monas\July92                        July 2, 1992

                             An Essay on Reason

                              "Philosophy  is  not  a  subject,  it   is   a
            way." (C. I. Lewis).

                             "Arriver à trouver où git le
                             malentendu entre la spéculation et le
                             Christianisme" (S. Kierkegaard).
Summary
      The point of this paper is to deal with  the  myth  of  "reason"  from
which rationalism arose. Rationalism is the position according to which  any
judgment or statement which does not live up  to  the  demands  of  "reason"
(perfect spectaculary 'evidence' from which absolute certainty  results)  is
defective and ultimately unworthy of being assented to by rational beings.
      The myth of reason takes at least two main forms. (1)   Reason is  the
knowing faculty, and it is a purely intellectual  one.  It  is  the  faculty
that separates rational from irrational beings, and it is identical  in  all
people--at least qualitatively. (2) Reason is divided into "speculative"  or
"pure" and "practical."
      Both of these forms seem to me wrongheaded. My purpose in  this  paper
is to become more clear in my own mind as to why this idea  or  "reason"  is
mythical and wrongheaded  as  well  as  to  its  consequences,  particularly
concerning faith.
                                  .
                             .          .
      A cartoon I cherish  shows  a  priest  or  minister  in  roman  collar
concluding a lecture with the following words:  "And  this  is  the  way  we
prove God's  existence.  Any  questions?"  Needless  to  say,  the  hand  of
everybody in the audience is raised.
      Very few people today honestly  think  that  God's  existence  can  be
rationally proved. In this regard the audience  in  the  cartoon  is  highly
representative. Those people who do not believe in  God  feel  justified  in
their non-belief on the basis that God's existence  cannot  be  proved,  and
they challenge those who believe to prove God's existence. The  latter,  for
their  part,  feel  threatened  by   that   challenge   and   consider   the
impossibility of proving  God's  existence  as  a  deficiency.  These  facts
suggest that both  believers  and  non-believers  today,  at  least  in  the
Western world, implicitly share  the  convictions  that  only  what  can  be
rationally proven deserves assent and that faith  consists  in  assent.  The
exploration of these widely shared  cultural  convictions--their  origin  as
well as their validity--are my quarry in this essay.
                                  .
                             .          .
      The passage in theological reflection from the regime of narrative  to
the regime of statements is the enormously significant cultural  event  that
took place in  the  XII-XIIIth  centuries  under  the  pull  of  Aristotle's
influence. What it entailed and continues to entail, for we have  not  quite
escaped that orbit,  is  my  central  preoccupation.  I  find  an  important
pointer in Frei's "loss  of  Biblical  narrative"  as  to  the  consequences
entailed. However, I think that the loss  is  greater  in  that  it  has  an
impact not only in the way we philosophize and theologize  as  a  result  of
the loss of Biblical narrative, but also in that, as intellectuals, we  find
ourselves living our faith in one way and stubbornly  trying  to  understand
it in another--incompatible and wrongheaded--way.
      What do I mean by the passage from one regime to the other?
It  may  be  suggested  by  reference  to  Aristotle's  distinction  between
speculative and practical reason. Much against his Platonic will,  Aris  was
progressively forced to give up the dream of a strict unique  and  universal
science such as he  had  dreamt  of  in  the  Posterior  Analytics,  and  to
distinguish  theoretical  from  practical  reason.  The  early  scholastics,
however,  fascinated  with  the  early  Arstotelian  views  of  science  and
scientific knowledge,
forgot practical reason. They reduced the  revealed  to  stated  speculative
information,  faith  to  assent  to  revealed  statements,  and  dreamed  of
theology as a  strict  science.  In  so  doing  they  shifted  regimes  from
narrative to statement.
      My  guiding  intuition  is  that,  with  the  appropriate  correctives
concerning the intellectual character of practical reason, the  right  model
to understand faith is practical reason, as it is to  understand  any  'form
of life'. Why do I call this regime "narrative" will become clear later.
                                  .
                             .          .
Characteristics of practical reason
      (1) Practical  reasoning  results  in  action;  speculative  reasoning
results in assent.
      (2) Practical reasoning is future-oriented; speculative  reasoning  is
a-temporal.
      (3) Practical reasoning is about objects of deliberation;  speculative
reasoning is not.
       (4)  Practical   reasoning   involves   understanding   and   desire;
speculative reasoning involves understanding only.
      (5) Practical reasoning is about singulars; speculative  reasoning  is
about universals.
      (6)  Practical  reasoning  is  self-referential  in  a  way  in  which
speculative reasoning is not.
Aris's mistake on practical reason
      Plato does not distinguish epistéme from phrónesis,  speculative  from
practical  reason;  he  reduces  the  latter  to  the  former.  Aris   moves
progressively from the same identification  to  a  distinction  between  the
two.  In  this  movement,  however,  episteme  remains  both  the   princeps
analogatum of knowledge and the model for  understanding  practical  reason.
The result is that
the desire involved in practical reason is (at  least  initially  in  Aris's
works) blind, only extrinsically rational insofar as it  happens  to  be  in
accordance with sighted understanding (See Gauthier, pp.  441-43,  and  204-
206.
      My intuition is that the  Greeks  made  a  wrong  start.  As  Gauthier
comments about Aris, "il s'agit pour lui de mettre en lumiere  l'originalite
de la connaissance  morale,  en  la  distinguant  du  type  de  connaissance
theorique qui est propre a la philosophie speculative" (p. 23).  This  shows
that his primary model was speculative knowledge and  that  he  reduced  the
field of practical reason to ethics. By contrast, I  think  that  all  human
knowledge, not just knowledge in the field of morality,  is  practical.  And
that it is not knowledge in the sense of episteme which  abstracts  from  or
disregards desire,  but  knowing-desire  or  desirous  knowledge  (intellect
desirant ou desir reflechi, dit Gauthier p. 445).  Furhtermore,  speculative
knowledge corresponds to a conception of the  human  situation  as  that  of
spectators, whereas we are exposed participants.
Gauthier's important passages
- pp.  23-25:  connaissance  originale:  ni  dialectique  ni  science,  mais
phronesis. Aris's evolution which results in misunderstandings.
- pp. 92-93: evolution in Aris's psychology from Proptreptique to De Anima.
-  95  ff:  Incontinence.  The  parts  of  the  soul:  rational  irrational.
Extrinsic rationality of the obedeint part.
- 133: Une psychologie eloigneee de l'hylemorphisme du traite de l'ame.
- 134-5: Passions et actions.
- 140-2: Passions et actions.
- 147: Decision, demonstration, production, et action morale.
- 148 ff.: Division de l'ame en partie qui possede le logos et  partie  sans
logos. Un logos est un plan, un projet. Et la sagesse  est  l'orthos  logos,
une connaissance antecedente de l'oeuvre qui permet de calculer  les  moyens
de l'obtenir ou la realiser.
- 189 ff: la decision.
      - 190: Action determinee par la connaissance ou par le desir?  Par  la
proairesis, par le desir raisonne que ques animaux n'eprouvent pas.
       -  192:  Boulesis,  le  vouloir  propre  du  sujet,  son  inclination
interieure et personnelle, non pas les  suggestions  d'autrui  ou  du  desir
irraisonne. Mais la psychologie aristotelicienne du  desir  raisonne  arrete
est indecise (il le place tantot dans la partie rationnelle, tantot dans  la
partie irrationnelle), ce n'est pas la volonte des scolastiques.
193: "le souhait nesaurait appartenir par essence a la  partie  rationnelle:
il  reste  un  desir  (orexis)  et  appartient  donc  par   essence   a   la
partiedesirante )to orektikon), c.a.d. irrationnelle, mais qui peut  devenir
extrinsiquement rationnelle.
Par contre, la volonte des scolastiques est un desir rationnil par  essence.
Aris's conception of affectivity  is  confuse.  Pour  les  scolastiques,  le
desir rationnel est un activite de l'ame rationnelle, qui possede  en  elle-
meme   une   faculte   desirante   distincte   de   la   faculte   desirante
irrationnellle, idee totalement etrangere a Aristote (194).
      - 194-5: Le souhait porte plutot sur la fin, tandis  que  la  decision
posrte plutot sur  les  moyens.  But  the  opposition  is  not  between  the
intention of a  goal  and  the  choice  of  themeans,  but  between  souhait
efficace et inefficace.  196: Pour Aris, l'intention morale ne saurait  etre
une boulesis, une souhait inefficace,  mais  une  proairesis,  une  decision
efficace. Plus encore que de savoir si la proairesis  est  une  opinion,  il
s'agit pour  Aristote  de  savoir  si  ce  qui  decide  de  l'avction  c'est
l'opinion ou bien la proairesis. ("A savoir,  l'opinion  qui  porte  sur  le
MEME objet que la decision"). 198:  Deliberer,  c'est  se  demander  comment
faire une chose, non pas se demander si une chose est  ou  ce  qu'elle  est.
Nous pouvons nous demaner si'il exise un ordre du monde, si la diagonale  et
le cote du carre sont incommensurables, si le  soleil  se  levera  demain  a
telle  heure,  etc.,  c'est  la  recherche  mathematique,  metaphysique   ou
physique; nous ne pouvons pas nous demander  comment  il  faut  s'y  prendre
pour qu'il y ait un ordre du mond, pour que la diagonale et le  cote  soient
incommensu
rables...
      201: Choix de la fin ou des moyens? Des deux. L"Ecriture  nous  invite
a choisir le vrai Dieu pour notre Dieu.
      202: Practical syllogism. 204:  Le  jugement  determine  la  decision,
c'est la decision meme. On reconnait l'intellectualisme  socratique,  malgre
son effor de  reaction  contre  lui.  205:  This  is  why  Aquinas  goes  to
"voluntas". 206:  Mais  le  decide  ce  n'est  pas  simplement  du  delibere
(intellect) mais du desire.  L'action  ne  decoule  du  jugmenent  que  pour
autant qui'il est sous la mouvance du souhait. L'intellect ne meut pas  sans
le desir.
463-471: SOPHIA ET PHRONESIS
848-866: CONTEMPLATION
