---
title: "THEKEY-2-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/THEKEY-2-1"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v2.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\WP\CHANTILL\THEKEY-2 February 13, 92

Aristoteles' Ethics and Antropology

This paper continues, and builds on the basis of the Aristotelian data collected in, "WP\CHANTILL\THEKEY".

My question is: Does the evolution of Aris's anthropology give me a good handle to deal with both his treatment of speculative and practical reason and to show the insufficiency of his views on practical reason due to his initial dependence on Plato?

My guiding intuition

The way in which one starts theorizing is determinant. For instance, Kant started theorizing by reference to Hume's empiricist reaction against rationalism and to Hume's scepticism, particularly concerning causality, but he shared Hume's assumption concerning perceptual and affective data. This is what led Kant to answer by means of his Copernican Revolution and of his dstinction between phaenomena and noumena, his vindication of synthetic a posteriori judgments. Once he had started that way, sheer consistency forced him to deny the possibility of knowing God and to ground his ethics on postulates of practical reason.

In Aris's case, too, the way in which he started theorizing was determinant. And he started theorizing after Plato and by reference to the same problems or questions to which Plato was responding, plus the problems created for Aristotle by Plato. What were those problems or questions?

Three models of Sophistry

In the Athenian polis, after the advent of democracy, influential political positions that were previously reserved to those who had been born into a hereditary aristocracy became available to the citizens of Athens. The Sophists were those cultivated people who claimed to posses the ability to educate the youth to become the useful members of the polis and managers of its affairs that they were called by the new circumstances to become. Socrates possibly was one of the Sophists or, at any rate, shared their interest in educating the youth in the best possible way. Some of the teachers or "Sophists," aware of the importance of the spoken word in the deliberative assemblies, conceived the purpose of their educational mission as that of preparing consummate rhetoricians, masters in the art of persuading, without any special attention to the actual merits of the proposals they intended to have seen implemented. This heavy accent on literary form, as we would say today, rather than on substantive content, could easily lead to produce shrewd advocates willing to use any rhetorical tricks for the advancement of their self-interested purposes rather than responsible citizens and able managers of the affairs of the polis. In fact, perhaps in part due to Socrates' pungent criticisms of this kind of sophistry, the name of "Sophist" acquired the pejorative connotation it has kept to this day in the Western world. Other sophists, however, such as  ---------

saw their goal in a very different way. For them education consisted in imparting culture, that is, in bringing their students up to date to the knowledge of their times in mathematics and the natural sciences but most particularly in what later would become the "humaniora studia"--literature, history and the arts. Their hope was that this cultivation would result in well-rounded personalities, capable of fulfilling adequately the highest positions of responsibility in the life of the city.

Socrates did not oppose this second kind of sophistry, but found it insufficient, foundationless. For him, education had a fundamental purpose that no amount of cultivation could by itself attain, namely, the discernement of the conduct that was right in each case--right for the polis, right for the managers of the city, right for the citizens. He shared, therefore, with both of the mentioned sorts of sophists the conviction that some kind of instruction was needed for the mastery of the art of being an excellent citizen, and that the purpose of such instruction was intensely practical. However, in Socrates' view, the education imparted by the humanistic sophists could as well lead to produce good as bad members of the polis and managers of its affairs, unless underpinned by and grounded upon a firm knowledge of what is right and what is wrong. Indeed, in Socrates' eyes, genuine usefulness accrued only to the person who knew how to do what is good. This is the kind of discernment for which Socrates yearned both for himself and for the youth to be educated. And what he realized was that neither the best of the sophists nor he himself possesed this sort of fundamental knowledge, the only difference between Socrates and the best of the sophists being that Socrates was not dupe, that he relized that he did not possess the knowledge that alone appeared to him to be ultimately desirable. Because Socrates, unlike the Solphists, knew that he did not possess the knowledge he desired above all, he could actually engage in the quest of the knowledge he knew he did not possess. By doing this he inaugurated, we might say without any pejorative connotation implied in the name, a third kind of sophistry, philosophia , the quest for the genuine sophia or sapience.

Socrates died without having realized his aspiration. What he left behind was, apparently, nothing more than a model of the passionate searcher for sapience that his disciple Plato and the members of "the Academy" would pursue after him. In fact, however, the model Socrates left to his successors included a certain conception of the sort of sapience he was looking for. And this is particularly important for my purposes.

The Socratic ideal of 'Sophia'

Socrtes himself, if we are to take his own declarations seriously, was not a teacher, a Sophist. He could not be a teacher since he had nothing to teach, for he knew nothing except thta he did not know. Yet, his very quest for sapience implies at least the hope of its attainability. And his dissatisfaction with the kind of knowledge imparted by the Sophists implies an at least negative idea of the sort of sapience he was looking for.

Whatever his disagreements with the Sophists, Socrates shared with them the conviction that the youth needed to be educated in order to be prepared to fulfill their future responsibilities within the polis. Hence, for Socrates, as for the Sophists, education had a very practical goal. This is why we find nothing in Socrates discussions that reveals a personal interest in the inquiries of his predecessors, the Pre-Socratics, concerning nature and its workings, the composition of the earth and of the stars. His total lack of interest in these matters seems to reflect his conviction  that he saw them as secondary, mere matters of curiosity that contributed nothing to the useful knowledge that interested him. Indeed, the sapience he was looking for was definitely practical rather than merely theoretical, since it aimed at generating good people, people whose discernment of what is right in each case would enable them to conduct themselves and the affairs of the polis in the right way.

The fact that the sapience Socrates wanted was practical should not obscure the fact that it consisted in a certain form of knowledge. Socrates also shared with the Sophists the conviction that some sort of knowledge was required to become the kind of person he wanted to become and help others to become. In other words, it was through questioning and thinking rather than through mere doing or acting that sapience was to be obtained, if at all. If he chided the Sophists it was not because of their conviction that the education of the youth had to involve knowledge, but because of the sort of knowledge they imparted the youth. Those whose ideal was to produce shrewd advocates were unconcerned with the truth of their claims and considered only their practical efficacy in persuading their audience. As for those whose ideal was to impart a humanistic culture, they pursued the truth, since they imparted the best available knowledge, but they did not impart the knowledge which alone would allow their pupils to become what they were supposed to become. Somebody has said that the originality of the Sophists was that the the goal they pursued was practical, but that they pursued it by looking for knowledge, that is, "they believed in practical knowledge " rather than in mere practice. Did not the Sophist            bitterly complain about the fact that the athletes, whose mastery involves no knowledge, are honored in Athens, whereas those whose knowledge is really worthy are not?

As to the particular kind of knowledge Socrtes identified with sapience, his mayeutic is revealing. For his questioning systematically led the people he interrogated to propose a definition of the thing they pretended to know. Once they had committed themselves in that way, Socrates proceeded to show them that their definition was wrong or at least defective, that they themselves could not in all consistency stick to it, that it led to unacceptable conclusions. It is noteworthy, however, that Socrates himself was the one who forced them to propose definitions in order to demonstrate their knowledge. And, if he ruthlessly attacked the particular definitions they proposed, because he found them defective, there is little doubt that for Socrates knowledge was identical with the grasp of the right (essential) definition, and that if any of his adversaries had proposed a definition that Socrates found satisfactory he would have been perfectly satisfied as to their knowledge of what they claimed to know.

To repeat, the matters on which Socrates interrogated had always to do with human conduct, for what interested him was the right conduct. The Eutyphro is a good example among many. The issue there is piety. What really is to be pious? What is the conduct of the person who shows and exemplifies piety? In order to decide the point--Socrates assumes and brings his adversary to assume--one needs to know what genuine piety is. Eutyphro ends up proposing a sort of pragmatic definition: "... to put it simply, I say that if a man knows how to say and do what is pleasing to the gods at prayer and sacrifice, those are pious actions such as preserve both private houses and public affairs of state. The opposite of these pleasing actions are impious and overturn and destroy everything" (14, b; Hackett, p. 20). Socrates is dissatisfied. If Eutyphro had given him the sort of definition Socrates wants, he tells Eutyphro, "I should now have acquired from you sufficient knowledge of the nature of piety" (ibid.).

But such is not the case. What Eutypro says is that piety is what a man does in prayer and sacrifice that is pleasing to the gods and preserves both the household and the city, but he does not say what is what the pius man does for he does not know what piety is, that is, he does not know the nature of piety, which is what sapience consists in as far as the right conduct of people in matters related to the gods is concerned.

It is clear from the dialogue that what Socrates is looking for is a definition of the essence or essential nature of piety, of that quality or combination of qualities which is common to all concrete pious conducts, by which they differ from all other conducts, and which explains why the pious conduct is pleasing to the gods and preserves households and cities . If only Eutyphro had given him that sort of definition--Socrates reflects at the end of the dialogue, "I [would have] acquired wisdom in divine matters from Euthyphro, and my ignornce would no longer cause me to be careless and inventive about such things, and... I would be better for the rest of my life" (16 a; Hackett p. 22).  

Thus we are entitled to say with some assurance that the practical knowledge or sapience or wisdom Socrates was looking for consisted concretely in the grasp of what sapience is, expressed in the essental definition of the components of sapience. Nothing short of this, in Socrates' view, would allow people to do what is right in their own affairs and in the affairs of the city. Such is the conception of the task at hand for the philosophoi, the lovers of sapience or wisdom, that Socrates bequeathed to his successors and, in the first place, to Plato.

Clearly, then, what was to be pursued in the search after sapience was a certain form of knowledge . This knowledge, however, was, in Socrates view, eminently practical because its possessor would automatically become sophos , a person capable of acting rightly both in the affairs of the city and in his own life. Indeed, for Socrates, the only thing that prevented people from acting rightly was their ignorance of what was right.

Plato's search after "Sophia"

Socrates' interest in practical knowledge survived in Plato.

The philosopher, after having escaped from the kingdom of shadows which is the cavern, was meant to return to that temporal kingdom to lead the people as their king in the well-ordered polis. However, in the process of attaining the knowledge in which sapience or wisdom consists,  Socrates' conception of sapience was significantly reshaped by Plato.

Socrates' quest, given his practical interest, concentrated immediately and directly on what is good and right in matters of conduct. For his part, Plato found himself forced to pursue the Socratic quest in a roundabout way. If the definitions to which Socrates aspired were to be essential definitions--and Plato agreed with his master that they should--then the philosopher had to turn his eyes away from the field of  changeable realities with which our senses acquaint us, where no firm knowledge and firm, lasting truth but only changeable opinions are possible, where the very instability and contingency of things reveal their defective reality. For vulgar people, prisoners of their physical desires and unconcerned with truth, this world of opinion ( doxa ) constitutes the real. For the philosophers, however, capable of overcoming the power of desires and of exercising their spiritual intelligence rather than their senses, another world exists where genuine knowledge (episteme ) is possible because of the eternal, unchangeable nature of the realities by which it is constituted. This is the intelligible world of Ideas . It is from the intellectual contemplation of the Ideas, hierarchically subordinated to the idea of the Good, that philosophers are to get the firm knowledge of natures expressible in essential definitions for which Socrates had looked in vain in the realm of opinion.

There is no need to go into details concerning Plato. What interests us is the way in which, in order to remain true to Socrates, he found himself constrained to modify Socrates' conception of sapience. Socrates' practical interest in human affairs had kept him passionately focused on what Plato would later call the realm of opinion, the world of the changeable and contingent, the world of immediate human experience. If Socrates pursued knowledge, it was practical knowledge he pursued, a knowledge that would make its possessor act in the right way in the terrestrial polis , not knowledge for its own sake. In this sense, we may say that for Socrates, in the practical-knowledge he pursued and identified with sapience, the primacy went to practice rather than to knowledge, for he wanted knowledge for the sake of practice, not the other way around. This constitutes Socrates' pragmatic side.

On the other hand, however, there is Socrates' intellectualistic side. The knowledge with which he identified sapience had to be firm and unchangeable, corresponding to the firm and unchangeable nature of the Good. This is why he could not be satisfied but with essential definitions, for only esential definitions express natures. If only he knew what piety is, his ignorance would not anymore cause him to act wrongly in matters of piety or to have to invent his conduct in such matters, as he explains to Euthyphro.

Plato just carried to the end the implications of Socrates' conception of sapience. If Socrates was right, then the grasp of essential natures had to be the deed of a purely spiritual intellect, since the senses dealt only with individual and changeable objects, not with universal, intelligible essences. The world of sensorial experience could not, by the same token, be worthy of attention by itself, since nothing eternal and unchangeable could be found within it. And then the lives of vulgar people, enmeshed in desires and fears of what takes place in the world of sensorial experience, were not worth living. And then a world of eternal ideas, of intelligible essences accessible only to those who had overcome all sensual desires and fears and who cared only for the truth that accrues to the intellect, necessarily had to exist.

Needless to say, the practical aspect of Socrates' quest for sapience had been significantly modified in the process. For what had started as a practical quest inspired by the desire to do what is right in the fluid world of experience had become a chase after eternal, unchangeable, purely intelligible Ideas . And what had started as a clearly anthropocentric and clearly ethical quest for what is genuinely useful, that is, good, for us humans, had become a chase after what is universally and necessarily true. The Good had been reduced and subordinated to the True as a species to its genus, and the Desirable had been identified with a particular species of the intelligible and true, namely the Idea of the Good.  No doubt, after his excursion into the realm of eternal ideas, the Platonic philosopher was meant to return to the cave to lead the people. But the philosopher's teaching would have to be primarily about what is true, not about what is good, for what is good is genuinely desirable because it is the supreme grade of the intelligible and true, not intelligible and true because it is genuinely desirable. Thus the ethical sapience for which Socrates yearned would be a section among others in the entire map of theoretical scientific knowledge (for theoretical, scientific knowledge is what episteme by contrast to doxa ended up meaning for Plato) rather than the only practical and only genuinely important knowledge Socrates had conceived as the object of his pursuit.

In short, what Plato achieved in his very fidelity to Socrates' legacy, was a reversal of the subordination of theory to practice, of truth to pragma, of knowledge to deed which had originated Socrates' quest .

From this it follows that there was an initial conflict in Socrates' own stand. Indeed there was. His initial concern was with a wisdom that should lead him to desire and do what is genuinely desirable, that is, what is genuinely good and right to pursue in one's actions. But his actual quest, in which his conception of wisdom became incarnated, was not for what is genuinely desirable but for what is necessarily and universally true. That is, he imagined the good as an object among others with a nature of its own as other objects have a nature of their own , and he attempted to grasp its true nature expressible in the definition of the good rather than trying to desire and do in each case what was genuinely desirable. More precisely, in his own life Socrates did the latter, but in his philosophical quest he pursued the former because his philosophical quest was a quest for the intellectually compelling demonstration that what is desirable in each case is necessarily so, that is, necessarily true. Necessary truth, however, has to do with intelligibility, not with desirability. What is necessarily so is, by itself, neither desirable nor undesirable. And what is genuinely desirable in one case may not be so in another, which is the reason why Euthyphro could not furnish anything more than a purely formal and pragmatic definition of piety--what is pleasing to the gods that is, to those who desire and do what is genuinely desirable in matters of prayer and religious cult.

Another way of putting the conflictive character of Socrates' undertaking. In his actual life, that is, in his practice, Socrates dealt with deeds, with actions, and aimed at desiring and doing in each case what is genuinely desirble. In his philosophical quest Socrates dealt with propositions, with the defective definitions furnished by his adversaries, and aimed at discovering demonstrable propositions, that is, universal propositions covering all possible particular cases of a kind, necessarily true because grounded in the grasp of the essence of the kind at stake. These two undertakings are inconsistent with each other and, if pragma is to preserve its primacy over knowledge, the one of the undertakings that has has to give way to the other is the second rather than the first. But Plato failed to see the inconsistency between the two undertakings and gave the primacy to the first rather than to the second.

Akristotle's Platonic legacy

Aris's philosophical undertaking inscribes itself within the Socratic tradition as mediated by Plato. That is to say that Aristotle began as a disciple of Plato, intent in continuing along the lines of the Platonic philosophical project. Indeed, as a faithful disciple of Plato, Aris initially gave the primacy to the intellectual undertaking over the practical. To him, however, belongs the honor of having realized the impossibility of assimilating practical wisdom to theoretical wisdom, as Plato had done. No doubt, by the very fact of bringing back the Platonic essences from the eternal world of ideas to the fluid world of sensorial experience Aristotle already significantly modified Plato's idea of wisdom. But he went far farther than that. For Plato wisdom was one , and it was achieved through the contemplation of the Ideas. This is to say that for Plato wisdom was primarily theoretical, contemplative, a matter of universal and necessary knowledge with a capital K, of episteme as opposed to doxa , even to true doxa; only secondarily and only insofar as it was contemplation of the Idea of the Good was a portion of wisdom practical. For his part, Aristotle decisively split the unique Platonic wisdom into two:   theoretical wisdom --"Sophia"--the wisdom that leads to scientific knowledge--of essences expressed in universal propositions that are necessarily true, and practical wisdom--"Phronesis"--which is, so to say, an  inferior form of knowledge for it is only true "for the most part" ("epi to pollu"), and which terminates in right action rather than in fruitional contemplation of the truth.

What I just said might suggest that Aristotle, in the course of his philosophical evolution, actually succeeded in putting Plato on his two feet and, thus, in recovering the practical interest which had originated Socrates' quest. Unfortunately, it is not so. The Aristotelian rescue of practical wisdom from its Platonic reduction to theoretical wisdom does not begin with the way in which Socrates lived, with what Socrates did, but with what Socrates and Plato thought, namely, that right conduct is primarily a matter of knowledge and, therefore, a matter of the intellect. True, Aris corrects Plato in his assimilation of practical to theoretical wisdom and, consequently, in his attempt to discover universal and necessary truths, genuine episteme , in the field of human affairs and human conduct. Nonetheless, Aristotelian " Phronesis " remains knowledge, intellectual rather than intrinsically practical knowledge, it is validated by its conformity to what is the case rather than by its bringing about what is desirable, and is ultimately subordinated to the contemplation of the eternal, unchangeable, necessary truths in which Sophia consists. This amounts to saying that Aris does not go all the way in his redressal of Plato, that his views represent just a modification of the Platonic philosophical undertaking rather than consituting a truly new beginning, that the primacy of theory over practice implicit in Socrates' theoretical undertaking and in conflict with Socrates' practical originating interest remains intact with Aristotle.

As a result, Aris legacy to posterity is even more ambiguous than Plato's. For if, on the one hand, Aris rightly discredits and definitively discards Plato's world of Ideas on the basis of which Plato's Knowledge was justified as episteme , he, on the other hand, keeps alive a modified version of Plato's wisdom and episteme by making his abstract essences correspond to intelligible, immutable natures within the world of experience, thereby keeping alive the tempting notion of universal, immutable and necessary knowledge which through the Scholastics will give birth to the Western idea of Pure Reason . And, again, if, on the one hand Aris rightly discredits and discards Plato's unified notion of wisdom as intellectual contemplation, he, on the other hand, fails to go all the way and rescue the autonomous or fundamental notion of action (which alone can support Socrates' originating practical interest) by preserving its essentially intellectual nature, a sort of sub-variety of episteme (which makes of behavior an automatic and necessary consequence of the practical intellectual act of judging) and by ultimately subordinating action to contemplation, ethical practice to the theoretical fruition of eternal, "divine" truths.

The turning points in Aristotle's development

Aris may have disagreed, and did actually disagree, with Plato on many points, and increasingly so as he aged. There is one point, however, on which Aristotle never wavered and which shows his unmistakable indebtedness to his master, Plato: there is such a thing as "natures," that is, intelligible realities which are necessarily what they are, which are consequently fixed and immutable, some of which at least are accessible to able by the human intellect, and which ground the truth of universal and necessary judgments so that thes they e judgments qualify as knowledge with a capital K--what Aris called episteme by opposition to the knowledge of what is so "for the most part."

N. B. This conviction underpins the whole of Aristotle corpus, not just his early works. Without it his   Metaphysics as First Philosophy is inconceivable. And so is in the Posterior Analytics his ideal of a fully constituted science into which no judgment enters that is not either deductively demonstrable or at least possesses the self-evidence of an intelligilbe principle. And so is in the Nicomachean Ethics his contrast between sophia (necessary and universal knowledge) and phronesis (knowledge "for the most part"), as well as his subordination of action to contemplation as the supreme telos of human life, which is grounded in the identification of the human with that almost divine faculty--the contemplative intellect.

N. B. It has been repeatedly remarked that in his more 'scientific' writings, that is, in the writings that correspond more closely to our contemporary idea of a natural science Aris does not follow the precepts he himself proposed in the Posterior Analytics . Owen, in the recent past, has been the most articulate and persuasive representative of this view. Martha Nussbaum has gone even farther. Indeed, she has argued that Aristotle's method in his more 'scientific' writings is fundamentally the same as in the Nicomachean Ethics . According to Nussbaum, in both his ethical and his 'scientific' writings as well as in his strictly philosophical writings in which Aris defines intelligible "natures" he follows a dialectical method which starts with what has been said by others on the subject and moves to what is to be said in function of our common human intuitions embedded in the way we speak of things. From this Nussbaum draws the conclusion that Aristotle himself never thought that knowledge was to be acquired in the way suggested in the Posterior Analytics , that the Posterior Analytics represents Aris's views on the teaching (that is, the didactics of science) rather than on the acquisition and the nature of science, and that only a misunderstanding by the medievals, particularly by Aquinas, led to the previously common view that Aris took seriously the notion of strictly universal and necessarily true knowledge of the intelligible essence of "natures."

Nussbaum's view seems to me to ignore completely both that Aristotle was a disciple of Plato and that whatever the measure of independence from his master he achieved was progressively and painfully conquered. The Nicomachean Ethics shows, concerning the distinction between the theoretical or speculative and the practical functions of the intellect, a far more advanced stage of independence from Plato than, say, the Protreptikon . The anthropology that corresponds to the new insights gained through reflection on deliberation and the consequent differences with the Platonic anthropology will not be formalized until the De Anima . This later anthropology is significantly different from the anthropology that underpins the Protrepticon , where there is as yet no inkling of the practical function of the intellect, of the notion of abstraction from the sensible, where desire ( boulesis ) plays no role, where the body is for all practical purposes the tomb of the soul that it was for Plato, and where the epistemic function of the intellect is exclusively taken into account. To assume, as Nussbaum implicitly does, that Aristotle started his philosophical career as fully independent from Plato and in full possession of his later views seems to me not only counterintuitive but at odds with the Aristotleian texts. I have nothing but admiration for what Nussbaum has achieved on her own concedrning ethical matters on the basis of her personal understanding of Aristotle. But this understanding moves from the Nicomachean Ethics backwards and projects into the mind of the author of earlier works convictions that Aristotle could hardly have had at the time he wrote them. That the view of science presented in the Posterior Analytics as the ideal to be achieved is unrealistic and even wrongheaded is abundantly clear to us. That it was so for Aristotle himself, particularly considering that such a view corresponds so closely to the one to be expected from a disciple of Plato who had made the advances in the knowledge of logic Aristotle had, seems to me to be itself a wrongheaded view.

Now, for Plato, practical knowledge, that is, the knowledge of the good, the knowledge from which right actions would necessarily flow on its possessor's part, was a particular variety of knowledge, of episteme. Though the eternal and immutable Idea of the Good was the supreme Idea, it nonetheless, from the epistemological point of view, functioned as any other of the Ideas. That is, it was the source of all genuine knowledge of the good, and it guaranteed the universal validity of all true judgements about what is good and right. This is why Plato did not find it necessary to postulate two sorts of wisdom, one theoretical and one practical. The way to reach practical sapience was, for him, the same as that to reach theoretical sapience, namely, the contemplation of the Idea. For those who contemplated the intelligible idea of the good would possess the truth about what is good and act accordingly, much as those who contemplated the intelligible idea of the triangle would possess the knowledge of triangular geometry and would correctly apply their knowledge to particular cases. In other words, what Plato established, at least to his satisfaction, was that

the practical knowledge Socrates was looking for was of the same kind, and to be attained in the same way as, say, the knowledge of geometry or of physics.

Aris's Protreptic (toward 354) reflects his master's viewx. Sapience (phronesis) is contemplative. It is the activity of the highest part of the soul, the intellect, and the knowledge reached through such contemplation is rigorous or strictly scientific. The knowledge of the Good provides the sapient with absolute norms for the regulation of his action.

In the two Ethics, particularly the Nicomachean , Aris is at a later stage of his development in which the distinction between two sorts of wisdom, theoretical and practical, makes its appearance. A first distinction is imposed to Aris by the nature of the object, which is action, for action varies with circumstances and is, therefore, a "for the most part," at best.

Thus, the knowledge of action cannot have the qualities that characterize episteme, namely, universality and necessity.

It seems that a first equivocation on Aris's part creeps in here. For action is taken here as object of knowledge by a contemplator. Someone who observes action and observes falling bodies finds in the latter a regularity not to be found in action. Therefore his knowledge of action cannot be expected to be episteme. However, it seems to me that the practical knowledge

Socrates was looking for is not knowledge about action, explanatory knowledge of action, but knowledge-how, knowledge-what is to be done, the knowledge required by the agent for the agent to act rightly. Now, the agent does not need explanatory knowledge of action in order to act, anymore than one needs to know the law of gravity in order to fall. Thus, whether or not action has the regularity of the fall of bodies is irrelevant. To put it in Platonic terms, the contemplation of the Idea of action would at best yield the understanding of the nature of action, the knowledge of its essence, but it would not help the agent to act rightly.

In fact, at this stage of the NE the equivocation does not lie exactly where I put it. For Aris, at the beginning of NE, does not speak of the variability of action as the obstacle for scientific knowledge in these matters, but of the variability of the goods pursued by people. ACTUALLY, IN 1104 a30 FF. ARIS SPEAKS OF THE UNCERTAINTY OF ETHICS DUE TO THE VARIABILITY OF ACTION. But for the momentI want to pursue the lead concerning the variability of the ways in which happiness is conceived.

There is here an at least implicit comparison, which will become explicit later in the NE, between sophistic knowledge (which is "one") and phronetic knowledge (which varies). This seems to indicate that Aristotle has not quite escaped the Platonic confusion between theoretical (explanatory) knowledge and practical knowledge. Aris somehow confuses, as did Plato, knowledge of the good with desire of the good as telos. In fact, however, there is no such thing as knowledge of the good, for a good known but not pursued as telos is not grasped as good. Desiring-pursuing a particular good is identical with knowing that good. ( On the other hand, one can desire and pursue as good what ought not to be desired. So there is something to be said for 'knowledge' of the good ). Thus there is an equivocation, for there is nothing in common (except the name) between the agent's knowledge and the agent's knowledge. SUCH, AT LEAST, IS MY WORKING HYPOTHESIS. The agent does not know, the agent pursues. What the Greeks called "knowledge" (and identified with the observer's knowledge) is the statable residuum of the agent's pursuance. And the primacy belongs to pursuance, not to knowledge, which is an abstraction from the object pursued.

Since for Aris practical knowledge was knowledge, he situated it in the intellect, even though in the practical intellect, for only the intellect knows. But the intellect cannot pursue, cannot motivate. If the motivating power comes from the object and provokes desire-motion, then, as Gauthier notes, there are three blind determinant desires, one of which is called rational by extrinsic denomination. To escape this, the Scholastics invented the will, a rational, self-motivating, appetitive faculty. But this faculty is different from the intellect, for the intellect sometimes determines it. (Only when there is no compelling evidence can the will determine the intellect to give the assent of faith). In what way is the will rational? Since it is appetitive, it should be as blind, as merely impulsive, as desire. In other words, the Scholastics merely displaced the problem. For Aris, decision had to be the deed of the intellect, for otherwise it would involve no knowledge, since desires are blind passions. For the Scholastics, decision resides in the will which is rational because it is enlightened but not determined by the intellect, except in cases of compelling evidence and when it is a matter of assent, not of pursuing a good. Yet, because the will, unlike the intellect, is appetitive, it is akin to desire and it should be blind. The intellect cannot possibly present to the will anything as good or bad, because the intellect is blind to goodness or badness. The intellect cannot motivate the will. And the will cannot be rationally self-motivating because the will is incapable of knowing what is. What the Scholastics wanted, as Aris in the NE did, was genuine rational-desire. In this they were right. But following the Greeks, they started at the wrong end--knowledge--rather than with the exposed desirous agent's action. And there is no possibility of genuinely conceiving a rational-desire once intellect and desire have been categorized in the way Plato did.

Thus, correcting myself, the ultimate object of this science is not action, but the good (later identified with happiness). And the variability of the good prevents the possibility of episteme and allows only for knowledge of what is for the most part.

Even thus, however, there is here an equivocation. For the ultimate human good, the for the sake of which of all human actions, is, according to Aris, happiness. And he will proceed to explain persuasively (not demonstratively) what genuine happiness is or consists in. He is addressing a human who desires happiness and who can deliberate (rationally) about what happiness genuinely consists in, who can plan not what he should concretely desire (as a means to that ultimate goal?) but also the concrete way to achieve it in concrete circumstances. But this is already to say that happiness, because it is a goal, not an object, canot be 'known' as the objects of intellection can. Its objectivity, so to say, conists in its 'aimability,' and its aimability is actualized  only when it is aimed at. But that is not where Aris puts the emphasis on, but in the variability, which prevents universality and necessity in ethical knowledge, as if it were something to be known rather than aimed at. Let me clarify this with an example. The weather is something knowable, though it is variable and, therefore, not susceptible of episteme; it has no fixed essence. Thus, there can be no scientific knowledge of the weather, meteorology cannot be a strict science in Aristotelian terms. But the reason why political science cannot be a strict science is very different, namely, it deals with the good, with the desirable, and the good is not a knowable precisely because it is a desirable. Herein lies this first equivocation that shows Aris dependence on Plato's intellectualism.

Though the good or happiness is variable, Aris gives a definition of it: "Then why not say that the happy person is the one who expresses complete virtue in his activities, with an adequate supply of external goods, not just for any time but for a complete life? Or shoud we add that he will also go on living this way and will come to an appropriate end?" (NE, 1101 a l7-l8).

Let us assume that Aris is right. Since everybody naturally and unavoidably desires to be happy, it follows that everybody who is persuaded by Aris's reasons to accept this notion of happiness will pursue this kind of life as his goal. But what kind of persuasion did Aris use? And what kind of statement is this definition of happiness or of the happy person?

It is a statement that can be meaningfully made only by someone and to someone who desires to be happy and who wonders about how to be happy. In other words, it is a practical statement, a statement about a desirable as desirable, a statement in which understanding is identical with action, if the statement is indeed a sufficiently specific definition of happiness. But this is, by the same token, to say that the arguments given by Aris are meant to persuade the person to desire and pursue virtue rather than pleasure. In other words, the arguments do not aim at assent but at practical consent, that is, at virtual disposition to act according to the specified telos. This is important for the contrast between sophia and phronesis. Sophia (what will, with Kant, become "Pure Reason," that is, ASSENTING REASON ) deals with objects of knowledge and terminates in assent to what is stated; phronesis, by contrast, deals with goods, with desirables, and terminates in action in pursuance of the goods.

Phronesis, therefore, is essentially related to desire, not to mere intellection. But there are two possible cases: the general desire exists, but the proper satisfactor is not known to the agent; or the proper satisfactor of a potential desire is known to the agent, but it is not desired by him/her.

Let us start with the "general desire." It seems that it is an empty fiction.  When we say that people want to be happy we mean that at any time they want or desire something(s) determined which really or supposedly will satisfy their wants or desires, and that in general they want all their desires to be satisfied, for they want to have all their desires satisfied when they actually desire. This amounts to saying that whenever I desire I desire the satisfaction of my desire. But this is an empty statement. For the person who desires does not learn or gain anything by this statement, since desire is nothing else than desire of the satisfaction of desire. A person who does not desire the satisfaction of his/her desire does not desire. And a person who assents to the preceding statement does not thereby start desiring or cease desiring. In the order of knowledge, the person who comes to assent to something comes to know something she did not previously know. But knowing about the nature of desire does not yield anything in the practical order of action. What counts in the practical order is actual desire, actual action, and actual satisfaction or dissatisfaction.

Yet one can desire food in general, rather than this food, and be motivated by that desire to look for food. To do this one needs to know food in general as satisfactor of the desire , not as a mere object, much less as an explanandum. But what is food in general? A common name for the particular objects that function as satisfactors of that desire, that is, of hunger. Thus what one desires in general is any of the particular objects that, on the basis of one's past experience, function as satisfactors of hunger, and that is what one is looking for, as when one wants to pound a nail one is looking in general for any heavy object. If and when the object is found and available, then action obtains. But one cannot look for happiness in general at any given time, since the desires are multiple and diverse and have different satisfactors which demand different actions . While I look for food I am not looking for water, and if I look for water I do not look for food or for a job.

What is the import of this? First and most important, that the orders of intellection and desire are different and that the order of desire cannot be reduced to the order of knowledge, that is, of mere intellection. But does Aris effect such a reduction in his attempt to define happiness? Let us see.

He criticizes the Platonists for believing that there is such a thing as the Idea of the Good. But does not Aris himself fall into the same trap by defining happiness in general? For supposedly it is the notion that, once grasped as the good, that is, as the desirable, should produce the actions that lead to happiness, since in the idea of the Good assent is identical with consent, given that truth is identical with (rational) desire. It seems to me that Aris's Platonism shows here in his very attempt to reduce the "political" to a "science" or knowledge--"the science of the highest good"--however inferior as knowledge Phronesis may turn out to be when compared with Sophia that is "una". Like Socrates and Plato, Aris is primarily looking for a definition of the nature of the genuine good in general, as if it were a sort of universal.

Let us assume for the moment that Aris's definition of happiness is right for the reasons he gives. Admittedly, however, the mere assent to it which would yield knowledge of what happiness actually is would not be the knowledge he is looking for, for it would be purely speculative, not practical knowledge, and what he is looking for is knowledge that results in action. Furhtermore, the knowledge that results in action is the knowledge the agent as agent has, for it is the knowledge that results in action, but the knowledge the agent has is not the knowledge of happiness that Aris presents here. Indeed, suppose that there is a virtuous person who acts as she ought according to the Aristotelian prescription for happiness (for it is a prescription like a physician's prescription, not a mere description) but who, lacking Aristotle's reflective ability has never reached the Aristotelian general prescription. Obviously this person neither has nor needs the Aristotelian knowledge of what happiness is or consists in. Thus this Aristotelian cannot be the practical knowledge Aris is looking for. Assume furthermore that, taught by Aris, this person comes to assent to Aris's statement, since by our very supposition it is the genuine knowledge of the Good and, therefore, corresponds to the way of living of the person of our example. What has this person gained by this knowledge? I think nothing. For one, the person did not need this knowledge to act in the right way, that is, to pursue her happiness in the right way. So this cannot represent the practical knowledge of the agent; it is, rather, the highest possible (and therefore emptiest) generalization based on the life of good persons. In addition, the good person would not be motivated to act the way she acts by this prescription, since by itself it is mere object of assent. Or shall we say that the good person perceives it both as good and true, whereas the merely intelligent person perceves it only as true? But, in that case, the true and the good do not coincide formally; in addition, the good person cannot be motivated by the Aristotelian good, since she does not need this Aristotelian knowledge to be motivated to act rightly. BY WHAT, THEN, IS THE GOOD PERSON MOTIVATED?

What this indicates is that Aristotle remains enslaved to Plato. He is looking for practical knowledge, and rightly so. In this sense, he is diverging from Plato, who had reduced practical knowledge to a species of theoretical knowledge. But, in mistaking knowledge for what Plato meant by knowledge and which leads to assent, Aris is replicating Plato's mistake. What Aris really wants is the knowledge by which the good person is actually motivated. But can what motivates the good person, or any person for that matter, be called knowledge in any significant sense?

Being motivated is actually and effectively desiring something, not just seeing or understanding something. A baby is satisfied by its mother's presence and dissatisfied by its mother's absence. This is not yet desire. A baby starts desiring its mother when its conduct starts being informed by its mother as object of desire: looking for her, expecting her impatiently, turning disgustedly away from anything else than its mother. This is the first form in which knowledge enters the picture of the practical field. We can call it knowledge if we want, but its object is not object of knowledge but object of desire. Desiring mother amounts to being practically attracted to mother. It is not a matter of having a mental image or even a physical presence and a certain feeling. The feeling itself, if we want to call it that, is thoroughly intentional of the object as object-pleasing in an inseparable way, such that the object is not the object if it is not pleasing and it is not pleasing if it is not the object. If we insist in calling this 'knowledge' we are simply equivocating, for it is something totally different from what we call knowledge, to which desire is irrelevant, and because this will necessarily lead us into the signficant mistake of reducing desire to a mere blind unintentional feeling (and consequently to miss entirely the nature of the practical).

Conclusion

I started with the question whether Aris's anthropology give me a good handle to deal with both his treatment of practical reason gives and to show its insufficiency due to his initial dependence on Plato. In fact, nowhere in this paper did I move to his anthropology. THIS PART OF THE PROJECT, WHICH IS NOT UNIMPORTANT, REMAINS TO BE DEALT WITH. But I have achieved something: I see more clearly Aris's mistake; he could not get rid of Plato; he remained sold to the priority of practical over speculative reason and futilely attempted to reduce the latter to a sub-variety of the former. What I need for the moment is the alternative to Aristotle's, that is, a treatement of practical reason that avoids Aris's errors. This I will attempt in "\WP\CHANTILLY\THEKEY-3". The remainder of this paper, entitled "Knowledge and predication" does not belong here but in the next paper. But I will leave it here for the moment.   

Knowledge and predication, desire and action

The separation between desire and knowledge begins with the acquisition of language and is consummated with the development of and the primacy attributed to predicative language and statements, particularly explanatory statements.

The agent is singularly situated,  future and outward oriented, and in the mood of desire-aversion,  for he is surrounded and scnstantly exposed.  The contemplative thinker is unsituated (neither here nor there, neither exposed to this or to that), a-temporally (that is, merely intentionally and curiously) present, and in the 'objective' mood. If one understands "Your mother is on the phone" as a statement for assent, one does not understand. Yet the thinking of the contemplative thinker cannot be simply dismissed, though its result is assent and not consent. Here Socrates and Plato and Aris are right. Where they go wrong is in believing that practical knowledge is a species of contemplative knowledge, and in attributing the primacy to contemplative knowledge.

Why cannot the knowledge of the contemplative thinker--of the objectifier--be dismissed? For the same reason that the capacity to receive such lingusitic information as "Your mother is on the phone" cannot be dismissed. He who tells me that judges, assents, without consenting, for he is not addressed. Animals 'know' only when addressed. Theoretical knowledge is potential practical knowledge, convertible into practical knowledge.

Take the statement "God exists." Animals cannot encounter God, and God cannot address them. Those who have encountered God and responded to Him as His addressees, are braced for future encounters with Him. If they reflect on their experience as His addressees, they judge-assent that God exists. They can make the statement that God exists to others. But they mean it as a practical statement, like "Your mother is on the phone." If these others have already encountered God, they will assent to the statement, but they will thereby not gain anything that they did not previously possess. If, on the contrary, they have not encountered God, they will not assent, except if they trust you. And if they assent to the statement they consent to God, that is they brace themselves for the encounter with Him, for the statement is practical. Assuming that they do not assent, you might feel tempted to give them the five proofs. Neither your faith nor your assent are in suspense. You are like a teacher who already knows the final result and assents to it. But you did not reach that result on the basis of proofs; as a matter of fact, your statement is the result of reflection on your experience of being addressed by God, an abstraction from that experience, rather than you experience being the result, or having been prepared by, the assent to the statement. Furthermore, you mean the statement as a practical statement to be consented to, not as a theoretical statement to be assented to, which is all that the proofs can yield. The question is: could you have reached God's existence on the basis of any of the five proofs? If so, your interlocutor can, and you are not wasting your time in furnishing proofs; if not, neither can your interlocutor, your student, and you are wasting your time. What, then, is the answer to the question?

The God I encounter is a motivating God. I live braced to his presence. Can a proof lead to this result, that is, yield practical knowledge? Can it lead to a statement of the kind "Your mother will arrive tomorrow morning"? If so, how? If not, why not?

The proofs involve objectification. Objectification  abstracts the object at stake, cuts in particular the ties of concern of the object to the researcher to consider it by itself.

When it is a class of objects rather than a singular one it focuses on a particular common trait (bodies fall, all observed entities exist contingently). It looks for the explanation of the trait, that is, takes the trait as explanandum. Even if we were to assume that the proofs for God's existence work, they would demonstrate the existence of an ultimate uncaused cause, of a being whose existence is necessary, of an intelligent ordinator of the world, but not of a loving God who cares for us. Aquinas concludes each of his proofs with the words "And this we call God." God we may call It, but Its necessity, its causality and even its intelligence do not in any way imply a personal concern on His part for the contingent, causally dependent universe or for its inhabitants. What, indeed, in the notion of a Necessarily existent, supremely intelligent, uncaused and ultimately causating Being entails that He has to care for anything? On the other hand, assuming that the proofs work, it is clear that the existence of such intelligent Being and of the teleological order of the universe are compatible with our suffering and death, since we actually suffer and die. Does not this rather suggest, as Bertrand Russell argues in his famous parable, that the God revealed by the universe is either simply cruel or at least totally indifferent to us? Why should such a Being be worthy of our adoration? And how can such a Being be equated with the God of Christian revelation?

Certain people who believe in the Christian God lose their faith when confronted with the suffering and death that go rampant in our world, or at least feel strongly tempted to do so. What is the logic involved here? Why do this rampant suffering and death motivate people to refuse to believe in God?

Obviously their Christian belief in God is motivating belief, that is, belief that informs at least some of their attitudes and actions. We are here in the order of exposure, not on the order of mere intelligibility, not in the order of concepts. When --  to use the proof by contingency--I take the universe's contingency as my basis, I take for granted the universe's existence. If I did not, the proof would not work at all, for the proof works from the contingent existence of the universe to the necessary existence of God.

My mother's future arrival motivates attitudes and conduct.

That is, I experience my mother's imminent arrival as good or bad (for me), and I brace myself for that event. Cant the statement "God exists," drawn from any of the proofs, motivate me in this way? Assuming that the proof by contingency worked, that from the existence of a contingent the existence of a necessary which is the reason for the contingent's existence necessarily follows, I would have to assent to the necessary's existence. But none of the proofs can prove the existence of a caring necessary. Contingent universe does not imply threatening or beneficent universe. The universe may be threatening or beneficent, but the universe in the proof is neither, and therefore nothing can be concluded concerning God's beneficence or maleficence. Necessity and contingency are purely intelligible, not attractive or repellent, predicates that motivate conduct.

Nonetheless, we make and understand attractive and repellent predications. But these we can make only on the basis of our exposure. Now "pure" or "speculative" reason does not grasp such predications. Santa is good to children. But to understand that one has to have experienced yearning for something and very particularly for toys as a child, with the added bonus of the magic of Santa to which children are so sensitive. Angels who need and have no use for toys cannot understand this kind of attractive predicate for they have no experience that would make it meaningful. They cannot resonate to these predicates either positively or negatively. But this, precisely, is the kind of predicates that do not enter into the proofs. Neither can they enter, for the proofs are proofs because they are based on necessity, but goodness and evilness cannot be a matter of necessity for they refer to singular subjects singularly situated.

 

 
