---
title: "2002-april-2-stanhauerwas-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/2002/2002-april-2-stanhauerwas-1.wpd"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v2.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

2002-April-2-stanhauerwas0 April 2, 2002

Gifford Lectures

I, p. 1: “For a Gifford  lecturer to MAINTAIN that the God that exists is the Father, Son, and H Spirit seems wildly ambitious if not foolish. Yet the heart of the argument I will develop... is that natural theology divorced from a full doctrine of God cannot help but distort the character of God and accordingly the world in which we find ourselves.... From the perspective of those that think we must first ‘prove’ the existence of God before we can say anything else about God, the claim by Xtians that God is trinity cannot help but appear a ‘CONFESSIONAL ASSERTION THAT IS UNINTELLIGIBLE FOR ANYONE WHO IS NOT ALREADY A XTIAN ”

I p,2: Accordingly Xtians believe rightly that few claims are more RATIONALLY COMPELLING than our confession that God is Trinity”

“Rather I must try to SHOW why Xtians who are theologians can be no more than witnesses. But the very character of that witness is AN INDICATION not only of who God is but why that which exists, that is, God’s created order, cannot avoid  witnessing to the One who is our beginning and our end.”

I, p.3: ”... I will try to SHOW that the very idea that we might know God abstracted from how God makes himself known was the result of the loss of a Xtian politics called church... I must try to SHOW why ethics cannot be separated from theology; or...the truthfulness of theological claims entails the work they do for the shaping of holy lives.”

I, 4: “The attempt to develop a natural theology prior to or as grounds for subsequent claims about God cannot help but be mistaken to the extent that such a project fails to help us see that there can be no deeper reality-making  claim than [that] those that bear crosses work with the grain of the universe.”

I, 4-5: “These are the bare bones of the position that I will try to develop in these lectures. I state them at the beginning without argument and qualification, because I will only return explicitly to these claims in my last three lectures. Yet these are the convictions that have informed the way I have approached these lectures as well as shaped the story I will tell”.

I, 5-6: “... MacIntyre does not think that A. Gifford’s understanding of the natural sciences should be a model for natural theology because Gifford’s view distorts the character of science. Indeed, I suspect that Mac thinks that our knowledge of God is more certain than the knowledge secured through the natural sciences {Note 4: I make it [this claim} on the presumption that Mac is a follower of Aquinas in these matters (“sacred science derives its certitude from the light of divine knowledge which cannot be misled. The practical sciences are hierarchically ordered according to the purposes which they are ordained. Since the purpose of sacred doctrine is eternal bliss, the purpose of every practical science gains its ultimate intelligibility from that end. Summa T . I, 1, 5). I think Aquinas would maintain that t he knowledge of God’s existence is more certain than what we can know from the other sciences”}.

I, 8-9:   “... t he arguments I will be making are obviously even more foreign to the purpose of the G Lectures than those of MacIntyre. Mac at the very least shares with G a profound commitment to philosophy as a master science [note 9: “at least they share the Scottish commitment to philo as a way of life”]. Yet as I indicated above I am a theologian. Even worse, I am a theologian who has been profoundly influenced by the work of Karl Barth.

My problem becomes even more acute because I will try TO CONVINCE YOU... that K BARTH IS THE GREAT NATURAL THEOLOGIAN OF THE GIFFORD LECTURES.”

I, 11: “... it will be the burden of my lecture to show that the difference between Niebuhr and Barth is exactly de difference between a theology which has given up on its ability to tell us the way the world is and a theology that confidently and unapologetically PROCLAIMS that the way things are is unintelligible if the God Xtians worship does not exist.’

I, 12: Mac: “What I now believe philosophically I came to believe very largely before I re-acknowledged the truth of Catholic xtianity. And I was only able to respond to the teachings of the Church because I had already learned from Aristotelianism both the nature of the  mistakes involved in my early rejection of Xtianity, and how to understand aright the relation of philosophical argument to theological inquiry. My philosophy, like that of many other Aristotelians, is theistic; but it is as secular in its contents as any other ”

I, 13: “... the strong distinction Mac maintains between philo and theo –that philo represents a secular discipline– simply does not do justice to the complex relation between philo and theo in AQUINAS, THE THINKER MAC MOST ADMIRES, or to Mac’s own historicist commitments” [note 16: “Mac notes he also came better to understand that in spite of what was right about official Catholic condemnations of Marxism, Catholic theologians failed to see that Marx was right to focus on the close relationships of theory to practice. Marxists rightly see that any type of theory, whether scientific or theological or political, when divorced from the practical contexts in which it is at home, becomes too easily a free floating body of thought that is apt to be transformed into an ideology. ‘So when catholic theology is in good order, its peculiar work is in good order, its peculiar work is to assist in making intelligible in a variety of contexts of practice what the Church teaches authoritatively as the word of God revealed to it and to the world.’ According to Mac, when theology does not subordinate itself to that teaching it cannot help but become one more set of religious opinions. Such opinions may be interesting,  but they function quite differently from theology in service to the church.  - I hope it will become obvious I share Mac’s understanding of practice, but precisely because I do I find it hard to understand why he seems to make such a sharp distinction between the work of theology and philo”]. [Note 17: “Mac doesn’t explain what he means by ‘secular, but I take him to mean no more than ‘not revelation.’ Yet such a view of the secular, which is surely to be distinguished from any views that would defend the self-sufficiency of the secular, is not innocent. My worry is that Mac’s understanding of the secular may be analogous to some of the neo-scholastic accounts of nature that resulted in making grace little more than an ‘add-on.’ ” - “... but contrary to Stern he does not believe his historicism requires elimination of the place of truth as part of any inquiry. In this context I only wish to question whether a history of philo as a self-justifying activity is, on Mac’s own grounds, possible. Such a history of philo seems to be the result of the professionalization of philo in the modern university which has led to the kind of specialization that Mac’s whole project stands against.”  

I, 17, Note 22: “... it is of course from Mac that I learned not to read Aquinas as an epistemologist. The history of medieval philo shaped by the presumption that medieval theologians maintained a sharp distinction between faith and reason in which those categories are assumed to name epistemological alternatives is fortunately increasingly being called into question... Inglis rightly argues that none of the great medieval theologians, e.g., Aquinas, Scouts, or Ockham, maintained a strict distinction between philosophy (reason) and theology (faith). According to Inglis they simply had no interest in speculative inquiry into human understanding for its own sake... Mac would seem to agree with the account of Inlgis , which makes all the more puzzling his strict distinction between philo and theo.”

I, 18: “For Aquinas, ‘natural’ and ‘revelation’ do not name epistemological alternatives. That is why I must try to SHOW that those who attempted in the name of Aquinas to develop a ‘natural theo’ –that is, a philosophical defense of ‘theism’ as a propaedeutic for any further ‘confessional’ claims ...– are engaged in an enterprise that Aquinas would not recognize. I certainly do not assume that MacIntyre’s understanding of the relation of theo to philo is to be implicated in such a misunderstanding of Aquinas, but I fear that his views may... give aid to the enemy.”

I, 18-19: “.. . I obviously do not agree with Lord Gifford’s understanding of natural theology. Lord G expressed the wish for ‘the lectures to treat their subject as a strictly natural science, the greatest of all possible sciences, indeed, in one sense, the only science, that of Infinite Being, without reference to or reliance upon any supposed special, exceptional or so-called miraculous revelation... in fact, his understanding of natural theo as a necessary prolegomena to the test of rationality of theo proper is a rather recent development. F.e., though Aquinas’ Prima Pars of the Summa is often identified as ‘natural theo,’ Aquinas never so describes his work. G. Hendry observes that it is seldom noticed that the so-called proofs for the existence of God were perfected at a time when the existence of God was barely questioned... In a similar fashion Nicholas Wolterstorff argues that ‘the medieval project of natural theo was profoundly different from the Enlightenment project of evidentialist apologetics.”

I, 20-21: “Locke sought to defeat the Enthusiasts by developing what W characterizes as a foundationalist theory of justified belief, i.e., as belief can be rational belief only if it is grounded in certitude, whether immediately or mediately. Yet Wolter argues that this kind of foundationalist project only makes sense in our modern situation . Without religious pluralism, it would lack social urgency or relevance... assumption that... if our beliefs cannot be so grounded ‘anything goes.’... The alternative between  foundationalism or antinomianism simply did not exist for Aquinas. In Mac’s terms, Aquinas as was not an epistemologist. Rather, what we now call Aquinas’ natural theo was intrinsic to Aquinas’ understanding of Aristotelian science and how such science must proceed if we are to avoid making of God but another item among the things in the world [cf. Eugene Rogers]. God,  the creator of all that is, cannot be –as the evidentialist enterprise assumes– part of the metaphysical furniture of the universe.”

MY NOTE: Hauerwas completely forgets the Platonic-Aristotelian idea of ideal science (cf. Posterior Analytics and Plato’s admiration of geometry), based on their opposition between opinion or belief and knowledge. This is the ideal to which Aquinas appeals in the first question of the Summa , where he asks whether theology can be a science of that kind, abundantly referring to the Posterior Analytics and the Metaphysics. As Hauerwas quotes, ‘The principles of other sciences either are evident and cannot be proved, or are proved by natural reason through some other science.’ How does this differ from Locke’s foundationalism, except that Locke was an empiricist? Quite another thing is whether Aquinas could remain consistent with that view of scientific theology. He couldn’t, but he bequeathed the project to his successors, both immediate and mediate, both theologians and scientists, thereby putting faith and reason in a collision course. What Hauerwas says of Barth can be applied to Aquinas, but not to many of his successors inspired by his ideal of science: “... often what Barth does is better than what he says he is going to do or what his methodological constraints should prevent him from doing” (VI, 7). Aquinas’s theology is demonstrative and based on statements (cf. his commentary on Aris’ De Interpretatione ); it is reflective or second-order, as are his judgments with sufficient reason (Cf. Lonergan’s Verbum ), by contrast to the Biblical theo-logein , which is narrative, affective and first-order for those who read it appropriately, placing themselves within its dramatic space.

I, 28:  “The assumption that the Middle Ages represents a time when Christians ‘got it right’ not only does an injustice to the complexity of the times and places so named, but betrays the Gospel’s requirement that even in a world that understands itself to be xtian, faithful witness is less required for the truth that is Xt to be known. When Xtianity is tempted to become a civilizational religion in a manner that makes witness secondary to knowing the truth about God, xtians lose the skills necessary to make known to themselves s and others how what we believe is true to the way things are”.

I, 29-30: “I think Buckley surely is right that the great curiosity of our time is how the issue of xtianity vs atheism became a purely philosophical issue. I think he is also right to suggest that it had everything to do with developments in xtian theo in which it was assumed that the reality of God must be secured on grounds separate from Christology... I think that Buckley is wrong to suggest that Aquinas is the culprit just to the extent that Aquinas allegedly began the Summa assuming he must develop philosophically a doctrine of the one god.”

I, 32: ‘ FOR THE ARGUMENT I WILL MAKE IN THESE LECTURES, I HOPE IT IS NOT NECESSARY FOR ME TO TAKE SIDES IN THESE DEBATES ABOUT ‘WHEN IT WAS DONE OR WHO DID IT... I REMAIN SUSPICIOUS WHETHER WE CAN LAY THE BIRTH OF MODERNITY AT THE DOOR OF SCOTUS OR SUAREZ. THAT WE LIVE IN AN AGE IN WHICH THE CHURCH IS BUT ANOTHER VOLUNTARY AGENCY AND THEOLOGY IS AT BEST, ONE SUBJECT AMONG OTHERS IN THE CURRICULUM OF UNIVERSITIES– IS THE RESULT NOT JUST OF MISTAKES IN THE 13TH CENTURY BUT THE EFFECT OF INNOVATIONS, SUCH AS THE CLOCK, THAT INTELLECTUALS (EXACTLY BECAUSE WE ARE INTELLECTUALS ) ARE PRONE TO DISCOUNT. Of course I am aware that clocks are also the result of ideas. - What interests me in these debates, however, is what they suggest about how certain metaphysical developments led to what I can only call the epistemological overcoming of theology . That overcoming I take to be a correlative of the Constantininan temptation to make xtianity a truth separable from truthful witness. As a result the truth that is God   is assumed available to anyone without moral transformation and spiritual guidance. Such a view stands in marked contrast to Aquinas... The Summa was Aquinas’ attempt to provide such a training (from another), but for it to properly do its work we must submit to be schooled by all of it. Which means that the Summa must be read, as I argue above, as a theological text.”

XAVIER MONASTERIO’S QUESTIONS TO STAN HAUERWAS

1 - In reference to your procedure in these lectures

At the beginning of your lectures (pages 1-5 of the xeroxed original version)  you state bluntly, without argument, “the convictions that have informed the way I approach these lectures” (p. 5) You yourself realize how foreign those convictions are to our culture. For instance, as  you state: “From the perspective of those that think we must first ‘prove’ the existence of God before we can say anything else about God, the claim by Xtians that Gods is trinity cannot help but appear a confessional assertion that is unintelligible for anyone who is not already a Christian.” To complicate your task even more, you openly confess that you speak as a Christian theologian: “the arguments I will be making are obviously even more foreign to the purpose of the Gifford  lectures than those of MacIntyre. MacIntyre at the very least shares with Gifford a profound commitment to philosophy as a master science.. Yet as I indicated above I am a theologian. Even worse, I am a theologian who has been profoundly influenced by the work of Karl Barth” (I, 8). And, what kind of theologian is Barth? In your own words, Barth’s theology is “a theology that confidently and unapologetically proclaims that the way things are is unintelligible if the God Christians worship does not exist” (I, 11), which of course is itself  an unintelligible proposition to all those who are not Christians, and even to the many Christians who, like Niebuhr, have been colonized by what you call “modernity.”

Now, though you repeatedly announce in the first four pages of your first lecture that you “will try to show” the aptness of your outlandish and even foolish convictions, which I happen to share, actually you do not argue in favor of them, you do exactly what Barth does: you just proclaim them, you just witness to their truth. I think that Frei would rightly say of your work in these lectures what he says of Barth’s theology, to wit: that it is descriptive, non argumentative, unless, as you suggest, presenting forcefully a different vision works as a sort of argument for those who do not share the vision.

My question: Is my characterization of your work in these lectures wrong or unfair?

2 - In reference to the difference between Barth’s and Aquinas’ ways of theologizing

The way Barth goes about in his theologizing is, at least on the surface, very different from Aquinas’s own.

First, couldn’t this difference be explained by the fact that Aquinas avowedly tries to theologize according to the Aristotelian idea of  science (cf. Summa , first question, with its appeals to the Analytica Posteriora and the Metaphysics )? As a consequence, Aquinas refers to the Bible which he reads as a text composed of statements about God and about creatures in relation to God to which he assents through faith,  whereas in his theologizing Barth refers to the Bible which he reads as a narrative text within  whose dramatic space he finds himself through faith? In simpler terms, doesn’t Aquinas do the “thematic theology” dismissed  by  Barth?

Secondly, if  you reject my characterization of the difference between Aquinas’ and Barth’s ways of theologizing (as you probably will ,instinctively), how do you characterize their difference, and what importance do you attribute to that difference?

3 - In reference to “the epistemological overcoming of theology” (p. 32)  

Referring to that “overcoming,”you declare yourself uninterested by “when it was done or who did it” (1, 29-30). Yet you reject absolutely the possibility that Aquinas be in any way implicated. Your main argument against those who suspect Aquinas of having done anything like natural theology is that in an age when everybody believed in God there was no need to prove his existence. Moreover, Aquinas was doing theology, not philosophy. Now if, as you say, what interest you in the debates about who did it or when is how certain metaphysical developments led to the epistemological overcoming of theology, I think among those developments you should pay attention to the marriage of Jerusalem with Athens, one of whose most fervent partisans was Aquinas.

The Athens of which it is question, at least in the particular case of Aquinas,  is the philosophical Athens, in particular the Athens of Socrates, Plato and Aristotle. Now that Athens was epistemological through and through. Indeed, at the origin of philosophy with Socrates was the distinction between genuine and merely apparent knowledge, between belief or opinion and knowledge, between doxa and  epsiteme, and the task of philosophy was nothing else than discerning between the two.

As a Christian, Aquinas was certain that God existed. In this sense, there was no need to prove his existence. Nonetheless, as a Christian married to Athens, he could not –and he actually did not– ignore the possibility, at least as a possibility, of the philosophical access to the knowledge of God’s existence. In other words, not in order to believe, but because he believed, he could very well conceive of the project of finding out which was the epistemic status, independently of faith, of the judgment that God exists. Much as Anselm did.

Whether or not he himself undertook that quest in the Summa , which is indeed a theological treatise, is a secondary point. One may grant that he did not. The important point is that in the first question of the Summa he actually  opened the space for such a quest by distinguishing between divinely revealed and not-revealed truth.

Let us be clear. For Aquinas, as a Christian, it was not a matter of making the judgment that God exists dependent on the evidence that might support it. Even if the result of the quest had been that the epistemic status of that judgment was, in philosophical terms, an ‘opinion” rather than “knowledge,” that would have changed nothing to Aquinas faith nor, in his view, should it have changed anything to the faith of any Christian. In short, Aquinas certainly was not a Cartesian, much less a post-Cartesian rationalist. Between Jerusalem and Athens, Aquinas loyalty was not in doubt. However, that does not absolve him from being one of those who, because of his Athenian schooling, contributed to open the space for the epistemological overcoming of theology.

There is more, however. Like Barth, Aquinas’ didn’t have the benefit of thinking within the Wittgensteinian linguistic paradigm. He thought as an Aristotelian, locating truth in judgments expressed in statements, and he conceived of knowledge as the conformity of the judgment to reality, and of truth as the reflectively verified conformity of the judgment to reality by means of the grasp of sufficient reason for affirming. These are the epistemic categories  he imported from Athens to his theology and to his theological understanding. Whether or not such categories of the Bible --though not necessarily to his practical understanding of the Bible as a committed Christian, which was biblical, that is, narrative understanding and from within the space of the biblical narrative.  He never suspected the conflict between these two ways of understanding, much less that he had resolved the unnoticed conflict by giving the preference to the Athenian way.

This needs unpacking, of course. Philosophy is a second-order or reflective activity. It arrives after the chips are down, so to say, that is, after people are already committed, whether by mere opinion or by genuine knowledge. Indeed, the point of philosophy is to discern between the two, so as to bring people from the darkness of the Platonic cavern to the light of certain truth. What goes easily unnoticed is that, contrary to what philosophers as epistemologists think,

people are not primarily committed by having epistemic beliefs or opinions but through action.  

    

Yet, though not a Cartesian, Aquinas had followed the Greeks, away from the Bible, into the real epistemic break.  

To say that he was not an epistemologist is not a solution. He certainly was not a Cartesian epistemologist who started with immanence. But he was a Platonic-Aristotelian epistemologist, very aware of the fundamental distinction that gave birth to philosophy  between opinion and knowledge, between merely apparent knowledge and genuine knowledge. After all, is not the first question of the Summa about the epistemic status of theology –whether theology can be a science according to Aristotle’s conception?

Certainly Aquinas was not an Cartesian or Kantian epistemologist, which it was possible to be only after the schism between the mind and reality had been consummated. Aquinas was a  pre-Cartesian. So he was blissfully ignorant of the Cartesian question of the existence of the world. Therefore, it would be inconceivable to suggest that he attempted to determine the epistemic status of the existence of the world, as you find it inconceivable that he attempted to prove the existence of God from outside faith, so to say.

I suspect that this epistemological overcoming of theology is closely related to the eclipse of biblical narrative studied  by Frei. Perhaps that is why you are so interested in it –an interest that I share with you. At any rate, you see it as what made unintelligible the right kind of theology and made it extremely difficult for Christians to function as such in a culture that has become totally foreign, epistemologically, to their convictions in at least two ways: it reduced knowledge to a sort of ‘seeing’ (intellectual or sensible); by the same token it made action dependent on knowledge, but made knowledge independent from action. separated knowledge from action Insofar as knowledge was reduced to seeing, the correspondence between what was seen and what actually existed or was the case had to be guaranteed either by irrefutable evidence or by proof, for otherwise knowledge would amount to mere opinion.

The effects of this epistemological revolution in the theological field are not difficult to discern. On the one hand, for the doctrines of faith not to amount to blindly accepted beliefs, they have either themselves to be evident, or to be proven. On the other hand, if knowledge amounts to a sort of seeing independent from acting, then the knowledge of God through faith doesn’t demand action and one can be a full-fledged Christian by merely accepting the truths of faith  without living as a Christian. Both of these consequences are strongly rejected by Hauerwas and Barth, who consider them unacceptable to Christians. But not all Christians see the epistemological overcoming of theology as objectionable. Hence, either they lose their faith because their faith doesn’t live up to the minimum requirements of rationality as they appear after the epistemological overcoming, or in order not lose their faith they attempt the way of natural theology, if not to prove directly those revealed truths that exceed  the capacity of human reason, at least to prove those revealed truths that are rationally demonstrable and pre-required for the rational acceptance in faith of those that are not demonstrable.  

 

As for Hauerwas and Barth, both of them think that the word of God needs no other foundation than that it is the word of God, and that the acceptance of it for any other motive amounts to a rejection of faith. Furthermore, both of them think that the acceptance of God’s word is not a matter of assenting to it but of living according to it.  
