---
title: "2005July1PolanyiJuly 21"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/2005/2005July1PolanyiJuly 21.wpd"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v2.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

2005-July-1-Polanyi July 21, 2005

VERBALIZATION AND ACTION

A possible significant difference  between Sartre and Searle regards their respective  views on  the role verbalization plays in knowledge. Both of them think that knowledge consists in the subject’s awareness of the object known, and that verbalization expresses in words the subject’s awareness. Now, in Sartre’s case, since his non-thetic consciousness of object differs from the thetic consciousness of object by the fact that the former is pre-verbal while the latter is verbalized, it is clear that the consciousness of object in which knowledge consists is possible without, and independent from, verbalization, though it can afterwards be expressed in words. This implies that Sartre’s answer to the thorny and much debated question whether knowledge can be wordless is that it can, for that is what non-thetic consciousness amounts to. Would Searle agree with Sartre?

To set the comparison between Sartre and Searle on the right track it is important to realize that, at first sight, verbalization plays in Searle’s views a far more prominent role than in Sartre’s. The reason for this is that Searle’s views are explicitly a theory of linguistic communication , which by definition has to zero in on what is verbalized by the speaker in the act of saying something to someone. This does not necessarily exclude, however, a previous moment of what Sartre calls non-thetic consciousness on the speaker’s part. In other words, before communicating to others that of which he is aware, the speaker may well have a non-thetic consciousness of that which he will communicate. If that is indeed the case, then Searle is in agreement with Sartre concerning the possibility of wordless knowledge.

That such is actually the case is at least possible, though Searle does not make this point explicitly. According to Searle, what the speaker communicates to the hearer through verbalization is the knowledge of what he wants to communicate to him. However, in order to communicate that, the speaker has to be aware of what he wants to communicate. Now, it is evident that the knowledge acquired by the hearer through communication arrives to him in a verbalized form, for the speaker communicates that by saying it. But how did the speaker himself acquire the awareness of what he wants to communicate to the hearer: through verbalization by the speaker of that of which he is conscious, or in a pre-verbal way?

Searle states his principle of expressibility as follows: “whatever can be meant can be said” (p. 19). From Searle’s own examples it is clear that he means that it is always possible to say, that is, to express adequately in words , what one wants to communicate. Now, in order to want to communicate something one has to be aware of what one wants to communicate. But the question is whether one can be aware of what one wants to communicate without previously having verbalized it to oneself, as implied by the Sartrean distinction between pre-verbal and verbal consciousness of object. This question brings us to the function of saying or expressing in words, be it to oneself or to others.

Like Aristotle and Plato, Sartre and Searle presuppose that, as the Scholastics put it, knowledge consists in the adaequatio mentis ad rem , for only if what is in the mind corresponds to what is known and out of the mind –that is, is real or out there–  can knowledge be genuine knowledge. With his views on linguistic expression Searle extends the same idea from knowledge to communication: what is said has to correspond to what is in the communicator’s mind. Hence Searle’s insistence on the possibility of expressing adequately , that is, of saying what is in the mind in words that fully correspond to the knowledge that the speaker possesses. Moreover, according to Searle, successful communication consists in the correspondence between the knowledge acquired by the hearer of what the speaker means to communicate to him by saying it. Thus, there is a strict parallelism between the order of knowledge or consciousness of object and the order of verbalization, for in both cases it is a matter of adequatio or correspondence: the subject’s consciousness of object must correspond to the object; the verbalization by the speaker must correspond to his awareness; and the hearer’s knowledge of what the speaker intends to communicate to him, thanks to his comprehension of what the speaker verbalizes or says,  must correspond to what the speaker intends to communicate to him.

The above amounts to saying that both Sartre and Searle conceive of the success –Sartre in the order of knowledge, and Searle in the order of verbalization– as a matter of adequatio -correspondence-similarity, after the Platonic-Aristotelian epistemic model. Now, Polanyi’s conception of TK breaks completely with that tradition in that it does not involve adequatio in any way. Indeed, neither is the ‘knowledge’ involved in TK a sort of picture of the object known that has to corespond to the original, nor is verbalization a sort of picture of that of which the speaker is aware which has to be adequately reflected in what is said. Consequently,  there is no room whatsoever for adequatio of the picture to the object. Rather tacit knowledge aims at appropriate action on the knower’s part. Consequently the measure of its success is whether or not the action aimed at obtains and whether it is appropriate to achieve the knower’s aim . In other words, what Searle says exclusively of the perlocutionary acts applies equally to the illocutionary acts, for there are no illocutionary speech acts as such, and there is no purely theoretical knowledge.

Two distinctive traits of the Platonic-Aristotelian epistemic tradition are absent from Polanyi’s views on TK: (1) the distinction itself between theoretical and practical knowledge – for all knowledge is practical or applicative and meant to terminate in action– as well as the primacy of practical knowledge over theoretical knowledge, for the theoretical enunciation of what is known is a prerequisite for the action. By the same token, desire which is connected with (intentional) action acquires its central place in knowledge, from which it had been expelled by Plato.

Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

The role of verbalization

According to Polanyi, tacit knowledge is tacit because it is not verbalized:

neither actually verbalized, nor even verbalizable or even in need of verbalization . Yet it is knowledge.

According to Sartre, though, knowledge can be tacit, that is, not actually verbalized either externally or even internally. That is the case with non-thetic consciousness of object. Yet this knowledge is not radically tacit, for it is verbalizable; otherwise it would be unconscious knowledge of object, knowledge of which the subject is totally unconscious –and that is a contradiction in terms.

That knowledge can be tacit in the sense of not being actually verbalized in external words poses no problem. This is what we do every time we keep a secret.

We are aware of the secret we keep but we don’t communicate it to others. In that case the secret is tacit to others – tacitum, in Latin, means not said , not actually expressed in words, not actually verbalized in external words. However, it is assumed that the speaker verbalizes the secret to himself, that is, expresses it to himself in silent, internal words, for otherwise the knower himself wouldn’t be aware of the secret he keeps, which is a contradiction in terms, for one cannot keep a secret one doesn’t know. Implicit in this view is that knowledge is intrinsically related to verbalization, at least to internal verbalization through which the speaker communicates to himself what he knows. In other words, if I do not express at least to myself in internal words what I know or am aware of, I do not know it. Knowledge, therefore, is coextensive with internal verbalization.

Sartre dilutes or weakens this connection of knowledge with verbalization. Indeed, he maintains that, in the case of non-thetic consciousness of what one knows, it suffices that the consciousness in which knowledge consists be verbalizable, without being actually verbalized. Yet, even in this diluted form, Sartre retains the view of the intrinsic connection of knowledge with verbalization: if the consciousness I have of what I know is not at least potentially verbalizable, then I do not know.  

A long, strong tradition, at least in the Western world, supports this connection of knowledge with verbal expression. Aristotle, seconded by Aquinas, gave it their explicit support. Yet Polanyi contests that connection, if not directly, at least indirectly by offering an alternative view of knowledge. Indeed, Polanyi’s “Tacit knowledge” is tacit or silent precisely because it is neither externally nor internally verbalized, and because it is not even verbalizable, that is, susceptible at all of being expressed in words, nor is it in any way in need of verbalization in order to qualify as knowledge.  

We may ask what is the reason that underlies the long and strong tradition that claims an intrinsic connection between knowledge and words. The reason is that knowledge is conceived as correspondence between what is in the mind and reality  – without which correspondence knowledge would be purely subjective imagination–, and this ability to correspond to what is the case in reality is extended to verbal expression, or, more precisely, to the particular form of verbal expression that statements are. In short, statements, in this view, express what the mind knows in words that correspond to what the mind knows, and what the mind knows corresponds to what is the case.  Thus the function of linguistic expression, at least in the case or statements, is a sort of verbal picturing of what is in the mind by sayin g it, as the function of the knowing mind is a sort of intellectual picturing of what is the case in reality by affirming it to itself, that is, by judging it to be the case.

Such, exactly, is the view of enunciative speech acts propounded by Aristotle in his Peri Hermeneias , and supported by Aquinas in his commentary of that treatise, entitled De Interpretatione. The only point that needs to be added, for it remains merely implicit in both Aristotle and Aquinas, is the primacy of enunciative speech over all the other speech acts. Because enunciative speech is the only form of speech that expresses what the mind knows, whereas the other speech acts demand  on the part of he hearer actions that presuppose the knowledge that is expressed in enunciative speech, the other speech acts are subordinated to enunciative speech, whereas enunciative speech is not subordinated to any other form of speech. To put it in Searle’s own words, whose theory of linguistic communication follows Aristotelian lines, if I ask you to lend me your pen, you cannot lend me your pen without knowing that I ask you for it, but I can know that you ask me to lend you my pen, and yet not to lend it to you.  
