---
title: "92-DEC-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/92-DEC-1.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


\WP\CHANTILL\DEC92-1                December 31, 1992

                       NOTE ON SCITUM AND CREDITUM
      "Nullus philosophorum ante adventum Christi cum toto conatu suo potuit
      tantum scire de Deo... quantum post adventum Christi scit  vetula  per
      fidem" (Aquinas, In Symb. Apost., init. (Opusc., Ed. Mandonnet, t.  IV
      p. 350).

      Aquinas understands faith as analogous to theoretical  knowledge.  The
person who assents to something on the basis of God's  authority  has  faith
as the person who assents on the basis  of  immediate  or  mediate  evidence
knows. Faith is inferior to knowledge in vision, superior  to  knowledge  in
certitude.
      Because faith excludes vision while knowledge includes  vision,  faith
and knowledge are mutually exclusive. Because faith excludes  vision,  faith
will disappear when we have beatifying vision.
      Yet certain truths of faith  are  knowable,  that  is,  accessible  to
vision by reason left to its own devices, though not to immediate,  only  to
mediate vision, for the philosophical way is through creatures (whereas  the
religious way is direct to the truth believed but  without  any  vision.  If
God made us see what he only states to us, He would beatify us but we  would
cease to have faith).
      I have many points of fundamental disagreement with Aquinas.
That revealing is stating and  consequently  that  believing  is  assenting.
That the  Bible  contains  revelation  (states  God's  judgments)  and  thus
indirectly reveals (states on God's  authority).  No.  The  Bible  does  not
state; it tells, narrates.
      But the important issue here  is  scitum  and  creditum.  For  Aquinas
scitum implies evidence and terminates in assent. Let us assume  that  faith
is practical consent rather than theoretical  assent.  Then,  if  philosophy
leads to scitum and faith to practical response, knowing and  believing  are
entirely different things, and philosophy which  at  best  leads  to  object
assented to (when not to mere scepticism) cannot yield what faith  does.  In
this case there is no possible opposition between creditum and scitum;  they
are simply different things, whatever the value of the scitum may be,  since
it does not result in adoration. Furthermore, natural  theology--if  thereby
we understand a philosophical procedure concerning religious matters--is  of
no religious value whatsoever, whether or  not  it  is  valuable  for  other
purposes. But in this case, Aquinas and the  scholastic  tradition  he  gave
birth to are totally wrongheaded. That, indeed, is my opinion.
      But what about natural--that is, not revealed--religion,  where  there
is adoration, religious ritual, practice, natural religious wisdom?  Let  us
say that the sun  is  perceived  as,  practically,  a  powerful,  benevolent
divinity (rather than as a mere natural force to which one is exposed.
      First of all, clearly, this is not a philosophical conclusion, for  we
are in the realm of practical knowledge, or rather of praxis (in  order  not
to equivocate with knowledge, wit scitum). That there are many religions  of
this kind is a fact.
Can we speak of natural revelation? The sincerity of this  faith  cannot  be
disputed, but its 'truth' can by a responsible adult.  A  responsible  adult
ought ideally outgrow such religion. Why? Because of the  problem  of  evil.
Our ontological dependence, our radical self-insufficiency  makes  us  wish;
our ethical self-insufficiency to motivate ourselves to live together  in  a
reasonably humane  coexistence  without  fear  of  ultimate  punishment  and
reward reinforces our wish. But the problem of  evil  conjoined  with  God's
absence, total silence about his attitude toward  us  renders  this  natural
religion intrinsically metastable, ultimately untenable, threatened  to  the
point where a reflective adult cannot live it in full authenticity.
      Notice that, except for the problem of  evil  and  God's  silence,  we
Christians and the 'truth' of Christianity are in thesame boat. And this  is
what renders our faith, that is, our religious  practice,  obscure,  without
vision. We Christians see the natural, absurd world of the atheist, and  yet
live in another  pratical  world.  This  is  the  grace  of  faith.  We  are
witnesses, but we cannot convert others; only God can, through us if  He  so
chooses.
      In conclusion:
(1) Philosophy as conceived by Aquinas, namely, as  the  work  of  a  purely
contemplative, neutral reason,  is  for  the  birds,  very  particularly  in
religious matters. Futility of scholastic philosophy  of  religion.  And  of
scholastic theology.
(2) Philosophy as practical reason. It is  always  precommitted,  prejudiced
by its practical perceiving as, never  neutral.  In  practical  matters,  in
matters of exposure,  it  is  always  committed  wisdom.  One  reflects  for
purposes of acting, and one reflects as a Christian, as  an  atheist,  as  a
Jew, as a sceptic, as a naturalist. Is  Christian  philosophy  possible?  Of
course it is, as much as atheistic philosophy, as  Jewish  philosophy.  What
is impossible is a neutral philosophy, a philosophy that is  not  committed.
What distinguishes religiously committed philosophies of the revealed  type,
at least Jewish and Christian, is its reference to a sacred  history  rather
than to a system (see below, note on  Motte)  or  merely  to  individual  or
national histories.
(3) So Wippel and Van are wrong. They inherit Aquinas'  wrongheaded,  Greek-
influenced distinction between reason  and  faith,  between  philosophy  and
theology, which rests on the notion of a theoretical, purely  contemplative,
neutral reason.
(4) How does this 'Christian philosophy" differ from theology?
Theology is committed reflection from and on the  Christian-human  condition
for internal consumption of the Christian community, to enhance  the  praxis
and  its  transmission.  In  this  sense,  Aquinas   was   right;   theology
presupposes faith, works on faith. Philosophy is committed  reflection  from
the Christian-human condition on the varieties of  the  human  condition  of
which the Christian is one, for purposes of a deeper  understanding  of  the
Christian condition, of dialogue with representatives of other varieties  of
the human condition, and for purposes of  defense  of  the  Christian  human
condition. Both are important reflective functions within the Church.
Rereading Motte's "Théodicée et théologie"
      It downed on me, from  the  second  part  of  the  article,  that  the
difference between theology and philosophy (theodicy in particular) is  that
the basis of theological affirmations are historical, whereas the basis  for
philosophical affirmations are
'objective'. The five  proofs  are  philosophical  and  yield  "the  God  of
philosophers". But Aquinas did not see  this  difference.  For  Aquinas  the
difference  lies  in  the  origin  of  the  data  with  which  theology  and
philosophy   work:   revealed   or   experienced--but    in    both    cases
'contemplative'.
