---
title: "92-JUL-3"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/92-JUL-3"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.0
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\chantill\July92-3                    July 28, 92

The Epistemological Rupture

In the thirteenth century, under Aris's influence, an epistemological rupture took place whose consequences we are still suffering. In this paper I want to convey an idea of what the rupture consisted in.

The rupture, to put it in a nutshell, of which its perpetrators were unconscious, consisted in a shift from the participant's to the pure contemplator's perspective. It took place in the process of accommodating theology to the requirements of scientific knowledge as defined by Aris in the Posterior Analytics .

The participant's perspective in theological reflection

Christian theological reflection is as old as the Christian faith. Glaring examples of such early reflection are the gospels themselves, most obviously John's, and the Pauline epistles.

Theological reflection as a spontaneous, indispensable function was carried at different levels and for different purposes. Within the Christian communities, for purposes of determination, clarification and definition of the faith, as well as of edification, correction and guidance of the faithful. In the contact of Christian with non-Christian communities, for apologetic purposes. It is clear, then, that theology in this general sense was not born in the thirteenth century. Yet something significant happened in that century: theology became a specialized, scientific endeavor, or was at least so perceived and intended by its practitioners. What until then had been spontaneously done by the pastors of the Christian communities became a specialized function of certain teachers and students called "theologians." Was it just a matter of pursuing in a more orderly and systematic way the theological reflection that had always taken place in the Church, or of doing something else than, and very different from, the theological reflection I alluded to above?

Relatively early in the history of the Church the Scriptural canon became the fixed and fundamental point of reference for the Christian communities in matters of faith. And it remained so for theologians in and after the thirteen century. In this regard, therefore, no change occurred, apparently. Actually, however, or so I claim, a radical rupture took place in the way in which the Bible functioned. For the thirteenth century theologians and on, the Bible started functioning as a receptacle of revealed truths, whereas until then--both for those who engaged in theological reflection and for those who lived the Christian faith--it had functioned in a very different way which I will attempt to define.

To start suggesting my point

"You cannot hear God speak to someone else, you can hear Him only if you are addressed. That is a grammatical remark" (Wittgenstein).

"A story functions as a proper name, and viceversa...

God is a particular agent that can be known only

as we know a story. It has been assumed that we can talk of God as if he is a universal. But the grammar of God is not that of an indefinite name but of a proper name. God is not a concept but a name like Stanley Hawerwas" (S. Hawerwas, Truthfulness and Tragedy , Notre Dame U Press 1977, p. 73).

"In the world-historical process as this is viewed by human beings, God does not play the role of sovereign; just as the ethical fails to appear in it, so God also fails to appear, for if he is not seen as sovereign he is not seen at all" (Kierkegaard, Concluding Scientific Postscript , p. 73, or 79?).

Think of the famous or infamous radio broadcast of Orson Wels's . A number of people took it "for real" and fled from their homes in terror; some committed suicide. Some other people took it as a play, as it was supposed to be taken, and did nothing but enjoy it.

Important characteristics :

(1) The text was "dramatic," not "scientific." It possessed a dramatic unity, moving temporally toward an outcome desired or feared by the participants. It was not "scientific"--a stated thesis moving toward mere assent. It was not "rhetorical" (?)--a deliberative characterization moving toward passionate response and action by the hearers of the text.

(2) The people within the text . They are like us in life. Addressed by objects-for-response because exposed to them. Their action structured by desired outcome: to suppress the Martians or at least to escape from their threat. They are the ones who determine, at their own risk, whether or not they are exposed and addressed, who deliberate and decide how to respond. At their own risk, for our general situation is of exposure to the surrounding world and does not depend on our awareness-as of it.

(3) The broadcasters . They function linguistically as "informers" within the text, that is, within the space of real or imaginary exposure. They give their characterization of the object ("Martians") in concrete circumstances of real or imaginary exposure, not of object to be understood and assented to (think of Kant's hundred thallers, p. 402, or of the theological concept "God") . Their linguistic characterization brings determination to the object-for-response ("there is someone in the house," "your mother is on the phone"...)--the kind of determination that the involved agent effects by conceiving a project and moving toward its realization, not by stating . This difference is important, for it is possibly the

difference between agent and scientist or theologian, AS ARIS REMARKED CONCERNING THE PRACTICAL SYLLOGISM.

(4) The people outside the text, the hearers . They function linguistically as "informed" by others, if they take it, AT THEIR OWN RISK, "for real", or as "entertaining," if they take it for imaginary.

(5) The spatio-temporality of the text . Any text, written or spoken, opens a space. The space opened may be dramatic or a-dramatic. For it to be dramatic it has to be about subjects of at least passive exposure in concrete circumstances of exposure and to create a temporal distance between the initial moment and the outcome. A dramatic space may be real or imaginary, and past, present or future in relation to the text's author and to the reader as subjects of exposure. Notice, however, that life is not a text. The involved agent is within the dramatic space "ABOUT-OF" which the dramatic text is.

Reflection :

(1) I said that for the thirteenth century theologians the Bible started functioning as "a receptacle of truths," something which had not been the case before. A few remarks in this connection are in order.

Truth and falsity are predicates of judgments and statements only. Obviously, though, the Bible is not composed of mere statements. It follows that an enormous part of the Bible is neither true nor false.

The medievals, however, thought that (a) statements were the foundational, selbständig units of the Bible; (b)

that the narrative portions of the Bible consisted of a series of statements; and (c) that the truth of these narrative statements was of the same kind as the statements of "scientific" texts, that is, expressing mere assent and susceptible of mere assent.

Let us start with (c). Returning to Wels's broadcast as a model for the way in which the pre-medievals read the Bible.

For the exposed agent, not only the question of truth is not primary, but it does not even arise, for truth is a quality of reflective judgment, not of involved agency, not even of direct perception which predicates nothing. The agent does not assent to the fact that the Martians are there and that they are fearful; he "knows" the Martians in fearing them and attempting to escape from them, as Nussbaum remarks concerning Hecuba's 'knowledge' . Fearing and acting consequently are not subsequent to knowing, they are constitutive of object-for-response by addressed agent. A Martian who under appropriate circumstances of exposure is not to be feared and escaped from is not a Martian. Nor did the hearers who took it for real first judge and then fear and flee, though this may seem to be the case if there is time for delayed response. They did not assent to any statement; they did not even judge.

Judgment as assent to object and as statement of object arises only in temporally posterior reflection. And, as judgment of particular, is temporally qualified: the Martians are here or were there. And it keeps its contextuality of immediate exposure or lack thereof, and as a statement to other agents is meant and meant to be heard in that way. In other words, as judgment of exposed agent, it is not expressive of assent but of intended or expected action or lack thereof.

Narration, too, arises only in temporally posterior reflection. Unlike statement, narration is not about object but of temporally developing event--where event is constituted by exposure of subject to object in concrete circustances and of actual outcome corresponding or failing to correspond to the desires of the subject and the outcome intended by the subject.

Narrations, unlike statements, cannot ask for or terminate in assent, for they are not judgements--scientific or otherwise. This point seems connected with Frei's contention that narrations are to be read as "realistic" literature (imaginary or not), that it is a mistake to hear them as primarily true or false, and that reading them as primarily true or false prevents us from understanding the Bible as a narrative. Let us explore this point.

When involved in an event as an agent, I am not within the space of a narrative. A narration is always after the event, in the past (whether real or imaginary), for it presupposes knowledge of the at least partial or episodic outcome, which is something the agent does not have. Involved agents do not narrate, not even to themselves; there is no such thing as "silent narration," as there is no "silent judgment" on the involved agent's part. For the involved agent the intended and the obtained outcome is not knowledge, though it may be such for the author or the hearer if their main intention is curiosity (though underpinned by concern for the agent[s], which is not the case in "scientific" knowledge); the obtained outcome is a satisfactory or unsatisfactory state of affairs, which will be the basis for further projects and actions. The agent's space within which the agent confronts objects for response is, as Sartre says, "hodological". This is our situation in life, the space within which we communicate with each other. This, too, is the space within which we narrate, in concrete circumstances that make the narrative intentions possible and for varied purposes. Now, if even our agent's statements are not meant to produce assent (except in specialized, artificial circumstances) but other effects, much less our narrations. But at least statements are conceivably susceptible of assent. Are narrations like that? It is possible to assent to a statement. Is it possible to assent to a narration?

The only way in which a narration can be susceptible of assent or dissent, of truth or falsity, is if it is a statement or a unified series of statements. This is the way, it seems, in which the Scholastics read the Bible. I think that such reading is wrongheaded. Nonetheless, there are reasons for their mistake.

The Greeks made the same mistake concerning perception (Plato's silent statements). And we speak of true and false narrations.

Indeed we speak of false narrations. But only when we deem them to be meant by the speaker or writer as historical rather than imaginary and we ourselves do not deem them to be historical. However, by themselves, narrations as such do not express assent on the narrator's part and do not demand assent. One may narrate real as well as imaginary events, but one cannot make existential statements ( existential judgments which involve assent) concerning imaginary objects or events. "The present king of France is bald" is not a judgment, for it does not involve assent by the speaker to the stated. Statements, whether existential or essential, are naturally expressive of the assent involved in judgment and, when addressed to someone, demand assent as the appropriate response, when they are out of a context of exposure. Statements are verbal expressions of the judged by the speaker, of what the speaker deems to be or not to be the case. Indeed, this is what the statement expresses by its very gramatical form which is predicative . As made clear by Lonergan, judgments are reflective acts in which what is grasped is the correspondence between what is conceived and the object conceived. Judgments, then, by their very nature, express a truth-claim and demand assent. This is not the case with narrations. Of what, then, are narrations verbal expressions?

I have already answered this question. Their content is an event that happens to someone. Their form is dramatic. Their

intrinsic perlocutionary effect is emotion as moment of action, not assent. They do not achieve this through statement but through agential imagination. Their extrinsic perlocutionary effects are as varied as the effects that can be intended by the speaker on the basis of emotion as moment of action, given the circumstances of the addressees.

Narrations, nonetheless, are speech acts. And they are, primarily, before becoming a written literary genre, oral, face-to-face forms of communication with addressees in concrete circumstances. At least implicitly, the speaker situates himself in relation to the narrated as the past, or as his past, or as imaginary past. This is understood by the hearers, which is not always and not as easily the case with written narratives. And the hearers themselves--either previously thanks to tradition or progressively because of the 'realistic' or'unrealistic' character of the narrated--situate themselves in relation to the narrated as the past, or as their past, or as imaginary past. Now, certain extrinsic perlocutionary effects are dependent on this situation in relation to the narrated. That, for instance, was the case with Paul in Athens (?) when he wanted to talk about the Deus ignotus. "We will hear you one of these days." Paul's narration could not even start. That is the case with the passion-resurrection narratives of the Gospels. That is the case with certain narrative portions of the Old Testament. On the Paschal night the Jews speak of 'our' night-- "When we were slaves" (Barnes, p. 216)--something that a Taoist could not do, for it is not his past and perhaps not even the past. If the Jewish child does not enter into that "we," the particular perlocutionary effect intended by the narrator cannot be achieved.

Now, this situation of the narrator and of the addressees can be contested and discussed by those who situate themselves otherwise. In that case, if the narrator is present, he can make explicit his situation in relation to the narrated which was previously implicit. Then it becomes stated. But does this entitle us to consider the narrative speech act as a statement or as a series of statements, as the Scholastics seem to have done?

The case seems to be similar to the agent's 'statement' to others. "Your mother is on the phone" is not expressive of a judgment and is not a demand for assent, anymore than "Fire!" is.

Of course, if questioned, the agent will state with belief, that is, with assent. But then he is speaking about the object as such, not about the object for response, which is not what he was doing previously. The object for response demands emotion-action, which is the perlocutionary effect the agent intends. The stated object as such demands mere assent. The agent cannot assent without being emotionally-actively disposed toward the object. So assent is parasitic on emotion-action in response to object, whereas emotion-action is not parasitic on assent. "Someone is in the house": if you do not believe me, all my arguments cannot convince you, only a further noise downstairs which will confront you with object for imminent response. And this will not be assent, though it can reflectively result in assent. The same with your situation toward the narrated.

There is, therefore, an illusion about the primacy of knowledge and assent. At least in existential matters, assent is parasitic on emotion-action in response to object, not the other way around. And this applies to situation in relation to the narrated. A narration is not a statement anymore than an agent's statement is a statement, for neither are expressive of assent or demanding assent. Even the reflective 'assent' of the agent is potential consent to potential object for response in concrete potential circumstances, not intellectual act of assent to object understood, as is the case with Aristotelian, "scientific" knowledge. Yet, Frei is not quite right in his apology for the narrative structure. He considers narrative as a literary genre, as written and therefore detached from addresser and addressee, not as a communicative speech act. This is perfectly legitimate in order to characterize realistic narrative as a literary genre different from all others. But Biblical narratives, as read by believers, involve their situation in relation to the narrated and are the product of the narrator's involved situation toward object for response before being narrated, and can be heard as such only by equally disposed hearers. One can, therefore, do what Frei does in The Identity of Jesus-Christ , but one cannot have the motivation to do it or gain anything from doing it without being situtated in relation to the narrated as a Christian. Frei seems to grant that, but not to be quite aware of theconsequences of his situational epoché.

Hopefully, we now are in a better position to understand the Orson Wels's case and to grasp the epistemological rupture I have been talking about.

Before being a literary genre a narration is an actual communicative speech act. It is always temporally posterior to the events narrated, for these are temporally absent. It is a dramatic characterization of the events narrated by the author of the narration. It involves an implicit, practical self-situation by the narrator in relation to the narrated as well as an implicit, practical expectation on the narrator's part as to the appropriate self-situation of the addressees in relation to the narrated. In the Orson Wels's case there was a rupture in communication. The practical self-situation expected as appropriate by the narrator on his addressees' part did not obtain. The latter heard the narrated not as narrated (and therefore as past, whether imaginary or real) but as characterization by a reporter of presently occurring events within whose range they situated themselves and to which they had to respond. The rupture in communication that obtained here was not of the most ordinary type, which involves a disharmony in self-situation between the practically expected self-situation of the addressees by the author and the actually obtaining self-situation concerning a single speech act (like "Drink Coke," understood as an order rather than as an invitation). Nor was it a disharmony between speaker and spoken to concerning a single characterization of object for response in a simple speech act (like "The pencil is in my room," or "There is someone in the house"). In both of these cases we have a disharmony not in self-situation concerning genre of communicative speech, but concerning either the species of speech act or the object characterized by the speech act within the same practical genre common to both speaker and spoken to. Not so in the Orson Wels case, where the disharmony in self-situation concerns the genre, the whole space of the communicative speech meant as imaginary space and taken as real space. Now, if we reserve the name "epistemological rupture" for this kind of disharmony or rupture of communication concerning the very genre of communication, we can say that the Orson Wels case is a typical example of epistemological rupture .  

Time to return to the Scholastics

We now have a certain idea of what I mean by epistemological rupture and, therefore, of what I claim concerning the medieval theologians. What remains to be done is to characterize more precisely the particular epistemological rupture that obtained in their case, to explain it to render it understandable , and

finally to sketch its disastrous consequences.

Characterization of the epistemological rupture

In a very rough way and as a first approximation, we may say that whereas the Christian reading of the Bible as a whole had involved on the Christians' part a particular sort of self-situation in relation to the narrated, the medievals' rupture consisted in a totally different understanding of the Bible's fundamental genre--not basically a narration, much less a narration of real events to be responded to, but a scattered collection of "scientific" statements to be cashed in the form of  a scientific treatise . The correlate was an impossibility on the medievals' part, and on the part of all those who accepted their terms, to retrieve the Christian reading of the Bible. However, as neither the medievals nor their Christian successors were aware of this rupture, they bequeathed to future generations a series of problems. Most important among those problems: (a) For Christian intellectuals, living one way and unsuccessfuly trying to understand themselves and their faith in another way. (b) Relegating the understanding that actually coheres with the practice of the faith to an inferior, unintellectual level good for the unenlightened crowd. (c) Consecrating their intellectual understanding as universal and superior, and therefore as the standard to judge the faith (which of course cannot qualify on this level).

The above underlined characterization involves three steps: (1) The basic literary genre of the Bible is not a narration. (2) Since it is not a narration, much less can it be a narration of real events involving real agents. (3) The basic literary genre is not narrative, though there are narrations within the Bible, because the Bible is stative (composed of statements); it is indeed a repository of true statements, a receptacle of statements. And it has to be stative since the Bible is meant to convey revealed truths . (One sees why Frei is so intent in recuperating the first step, though perhaps his isolating the first from the second step is misguided).

The first two steps concern the traditional Christian reading of the Bible. A few words concerning this.

Whatever an author's intentions may be, his speech acts as communicative cannot be arbitrary selected, because different speech acts have different intrinsic perlocutionary effects. (I will have to deal with Searle's illocutionary force and effect, which is detacheable or not identical with the perlocutionary ones only in the case of statements). The intrinsic perlocutionary effect of a speech act is connected with its meaning; it is the effect meant to be produced by a speech act by virtue of its meaning, (of its form?). Thus a salutation is meant to produce being saluted; an order, being obeyed; an invitation, being considered invitationally; a compliment, being complimented; an agent-statement of object, being confronted with object for response as characterized; an agent-statement of relation, being related with the speaker as characterized; an insult, being insulted, etc. etc. Except perhaps for very special circumstances, one cannot give an order by uttering a compliment, or characterize an object by uttering a salutation. The same obtains in the case of complex speech acts, such as narrations. One cannot obtain or mean to obtain the intrinsic perlocutionary effect of dramatic presentation of events and characters which are typical of narration otherwise than by narrating, as one cannot obtain the intrinsic perlocutionary effect of agent-statement by narrating. And this applies to the books of the Bible as much as to any other text. If, therefore, the medievals

read the Bible's narratives not as narratives but as anything else, they made a mistake. And if they read as anything else the narratives that Christians had previously read as narratives, they created an epistemological chasm between them and the Christian tradition.

But here we are talking of the fundamental literary genre of the Bible as narrative, not of the genre of this or that book or this or that passage within a book. When I say that Christians read the Bible as fundamentally narrative I mean that they read the Bible as a unit composed of different books with different literary genres, and that the unit arose from the fact of their attributing structural primacy to the 'historical' books, to the books they took as 'historical'. In other words, they understood and made sense of the books that are not narrative, such as the Psalms, the Song of Songs, the sapiential books, by reference to the narrative books, not the other way around.

Here again, we come across the fact that the choice of genre, both on the author's and on the reader's part, is not arbitrary. In other words, certain perlocutionary effects can be obtained only be certain speech acts and literary genres and not by others. Following Ashbauch, Frei speaks of "realistic narratives." Which are these? Texts that by their form (dramatic), by their content (events conceivable within our world as we know it by our familiarity with it, in which conceivable characters are involved--conceivable given our experience of characters--and by their common rather than exalted style can be taken as real, as actually having taken place. Now this applies only to narrative texts of the kind just roughly characterized. And this, in its turn, implies that this particular perlocutionary effect can be produced only by narratives of this type. And that if the authors of the Bible meant to produce the effect of their words being taken as historical and 'emoting in response', they had to employ realistic narratives. And that, whether or not they intended that, they actually produced texts of that kind which actually produced in Christians this perlocutionary effect by virtue of their narrative meaning.

A furter step. Those who are not Christians situate themselves in relation to the narrated in these biblical passages or books in a similar way to those who took Well's text for a play. In other words, they do not hear them as historical. Even in that case, though, they 'emote in response', by virtue of the narrative meaning of the text and of its realistic characteristics, much as someone who is not a Christian can 'emote in response' to the passage of the sacrifice of Isaac by Abraham, for that is the intrinsic effect of realistic narratives which no other speech act or literary genre produces or is meant to produce.

We may now draw an important conclusion. If indeed the Bible has realistic narratives, and if indeed the traditional Christian reading of the Bible is fairly characterized as hearing those passages in the self-situation of as to one's own past, and if no other literary genre is susceptible of being so read, then it follows that the medieval theologians effected a tremendous epistemological rupture with the tradition, if indeed they

read the Bible in a different way. But did they? Did they actually not read the Bible as being fundamentally a realistic narrative in relation to whose narrated people could situate themselves as being their own past (or as being imaginary), but rather as being a repository of scattered abstract, "scientific" revealed truths to be assented to and ordered into an intellectual system? THIS IS OUR QUESTION NOW.

The medievals' reading of the Bible

This part is laborious but easy. Their primary preoccupation was truth, which is a quality of reflective judgments. Emoting in response or actually responding in action were absent from their horizon. See John Baillie, The Idea of Revelation in Recent Thought (Columbia U. Press, New York 1956).  - Here I have to explain why the medievals did that (the Greek influence), and why they did not realize the epistemological rupture they had effected.

THIS PAPER IS CONTINUED BY \WP\c CHANTILL\AUG92-1: "NATURAL THEOLOGY."

\WP\CHANTILL\AUG92-1 Aug. 6, 92

NATURAL THEOLOGY

"Prior to its contact with Greek thought the Hebrew mind knew nothing of natural theology..." (John Baillie, The Idea of Revelation in Recent Thought (Columbia U. Press, N. Y. 1964), p. 126

The consequences of the epistemological rupture

There are many consequences and highly significant. I want to highlight a few.

(1) The primacy of orthodoxia over orthopraxis :

(2) The problem of faith and reason as seeing the truth : Once objectification takes place and the desire to know takes over, the relationship of exposure is neutralized. The subject stands as mere contemplator of abstract object without distance, certainly without distance of exposure. The object becomes grammatical subject of inquiry and speculative predication.

Let the object be God. The Christian theologian, through revelation, supposedly knows that certain predicates belong to God, and that God exists. Supposedly, he also knows through unassisted reason that the Uncaused Cause exists, and that the Uncaused Cause possesses all perfection: omnipotence, omnisicence, goodness... But he neither does nor can know through unassisted reason that God is Trinitarian. Furthermore, only on the basis of this knowledge can he emote and act in response to God, though the knowledge he possesses is as cold as his knowledge of the geometrical triangle, and he can arrive at this knowledge without ever having interacted with God. In other words, knowledge is not only primary, in that it grounds emotion and action, but it is also independent of action, whereas action is both secondary and dependent. And one can be perfectly faithful through cold assent to everything without charity ("dead faith"), whereas one cannot be charitable without cold assent. In any case, one can be a perfect theologian without ever having prayed God and practised the faith. WHAT IS WRONG WITH ALL THIS?

Assent is a quality of reflective judgment. It is the personal commitment to the truth of the judged based exclusively on the intelligent grasp of sufficient reason for affirming the judged, for judging is an intelligent reflective activity that by its nature cannot obtain without something being understood, and what is understood in the case of judgment is precisely the sufficient reason for affirming or denying. In the case of the assent of faith, the sufficient reason is not the evidence of the judged but the authority of the Revealer. This creates a thorny problem, however. Is the authority of the Revealer itself evident to unassisted reason, or is it a matter of faith? If the former, then it can be made evident through reasoning to those who do not have the faith assistance and do not believe in the Revealer. But if they do not believe that the Revealer exists, how can His authority become evident to them? If the latter, then faith is totally irrational, completely blind. Christians, with glaring exceptions such as Tertullian--"What has Jerusalem to do with Athens!"--and Chrisogonus (?), refused to grant that their faith was irrational or even entirely suprarational. On the other hand, they could not pretend that all the truths of their faith were acceessible to reason left to itself without revelation. Thus, certain truths of faith are suprarational. Other truths of faith, however, are rational, that is, accessible to reason left to itself. These are accepted by the faithful primarily on God's authority, by the non-believers primarily and exclusively on their evidential character. The subject-matter of theology are all the revealed truths under the formality of their being revealed. The subject matter of a special branch of philosophy that we might call "Natural theology" are all the truths concerning God and religious matters that are accessible to unassisted reason. The suprarational truths of faith belong exclusively in the domain of theology. The truths that are both revealed and rationally demonstrable belong as such in both the domain of theology and of natural theology, though they enter each domain under a different formality: they enter theology as revealed, and natural theology as evidential.

Now, these truths that are both revealed and rationally demonstrable insure the fundamental rationality of faith and indirectly ground the suprarationality of the truths that are revealed but unaccessible to unassisted reason. They are, so to say, the rational door to faith--" praeambula fidei ." If, for instance, it can be proven that God exists--and it can, for this is a truth accessible to unassisted reason--, then His authority is established, given His absolute veracity and infallibility, as well as the possibility that He may reveal.

Needles to say, natural theology became a vital discipline to Christians as the guarantee of the fundamental rationality  of their faith-commitment to God, and as the means to bring the non-believers to the rational entrance to faith. Unfortunately, as demonstrated by the subsequent history, from the sefcond half of the thirteenth century on, a host of problems loomed in the future of natural theology and of the very conception of faith and its rationality which gave birth to this discipline.

A first problem, already rampant in the fourth quarter of the thirteenth century. The Aristotelian notion of "scientific knowledge" adopted by the theologians who consecrated the view of faith to assent to the truths revealed by God on the basis of His authority, and which allowed them to place theology in the scientific orbit, introduced a fundamental distinction between unassisted and assisted reason and, correlatively, between natural theology and theology. Now, by its very nature, natural theology was a domain in which Christian beliefs were to be  methodically neutralized, if possessed by its practitioner. What, then, was a Christian 'natural theologian" to do if the evidence did not lead him to conclusions that cohered with the truths he accepted through faith? What, for instance, if he found shaky the five Thomistic ways to establish God's existence rationally, or if he found positively compelling the for the eternity of the world? For Aquinas the answer was clear: The assent to the revealed truth was to be maintained and reason renounced provisionally until more study and new and better evidence was found in support of the praeambula fidei, for no contradiction could possibly exist between faith and reason, given that God is the author of both. It is also true, however, that Aquinas had affirmed no less forcefully the autonomy of unassisted reason within its proper domain, and he categorically viewed natural theology as natural, as a part of the proper domain of unassisted reason. The practitioner of natural theology, therefore, was fully entitled and--even constrained by the nature of his undertaking--to use reason and to follow the evidential path loyally wherever it led, as much as the practitioner of physics is entitled to do the same, for both natural theology and physics belong in the proper and autonomous domain of unassisted reason. And this, in fact, is what happened. Already around 1270 there were bitter complaints at the University of Paris that the students of philosophy were unwilling to see their undertaking curtailed by considerations of faith and demanded for their discipline the autonomy that belonged to it by nature. The theory of the two truths was seriously proposed. And only a few years after his death, a number of Aquinas own philosophical stands were officially condemned by the Church as incompatible with certain revealed truths.

In short, there is no doubt that Aquinas himself accorded ultimate primacy to the knowledge of faith over the conclusions reached by unassisted reason in case of apparent contradictions between the two. No less doutful, however, is the fact that his notions of revelation as transmission of knowledge by God, of the revealed as divine truths, of faith as assent to the truths revealed, as well as his distinction between faithful or assisted reason and unassisted reason, between the truths of faith inaccessible to unassisted reason and the truths of faith accessible to unassisted reason and between theology and natural theology or "philosophy" of religion were such as not only to render the conflict between faith and reason inevitable but, ultimately, to guarantee the supremacy of reason over faith.

Aquinas himself did not, of course, realize these implications of his views. The idea of a real conflict between the conclusions reached by unassisted reason and the doctrines revealed by God was inconceivable to him, for it would imply that the Creator of human reason would make impossible to assent of faith by assisted reason to those revealed doctrines that contradicted the conclusions of unassisted reason, given that it is of the nature of human reason to assent to what is irrecusable evident for it. As a consequence of this fundamental axiom, the contradictions between revealed doctrines and the conclusions of unassisted reason could only be apparent and due to the weakness of human reason. From which it followed that in case of experienced contradiction between a revealed doctrine and a conclusion reached by unassisted reason working within its proper domain, the contradiction could only be apparent, it would be dissolved inthe short or the long run by a more accurate and efficient exercise of unassisted reason, it would ultimately result in the correction of the erroneus conclusion previously reached by unassisted reason, and in the meantime the believer should adhere to the revealed doctrine, refuse to assent to the erroneous conclusion reached by unassisted reason, and patiently look for a conclusion compatible with the doctrine of faith.

Granting that such was Aquinas personal position, the fact remains nonetheless that lived conflict--be it apparent or real--between revealed doctrines of faith and  conclusions of unassisted reason was admittedly possible. Indeed, it could not be otherwise, since Aquinas conceived of faith as an intellectual act of assent of reason assisted by God, while granting that the same reason working on its own and according to its truth-seeking nature was capable of reaching assentful conclusions concerning those revealed matters that were naturally accessible to its capacity. In other words, once it is admitted that faith is knowledge gained through divine authority and that, in certain cases, reason working on its own and on the basis of evdence is capable of reaching knowledge about the same object, the possibility that the revealed doctrine about that object and the conclusion reached about that object by unassisted reason be in conflict is unavoidable. This is why Aquinas could not avoid foreseeing at least apparent conflicts between revealed doctrines

adhered to by assisted reason and conclusions reached by unasisted reason.

A second point, concerning the autonomy of reason. The same confidence in God that led Aquinas to his certainty that the conflict could be only apparent and temporary, led him also to the certainty that unassisted reason could work out its way to the truth in matters that fell within its natural capacity. Therefore, in those matters, reason was to be granted full autonomy, for only following the evidential path could it reach the truth.

A third point, concerning the rationality of faith. By the very fact of conceiving the revealed as knowledge and of faith as an act of intellectual assent produced under God's assistance by the only human faculty capable of assenting, namely, reason, Aquinas placed both God's revelation and faith within the general domain of rationality. Indeed, this is why Aquinas, at the same time that he granted the possibility of apparent conflict between revealed doctrines and conclusions of unassisted reason--which are rational conflicts, conflicts betwen two rationally incompatible propositions the assent to one of which cannot possibly obtain without excluding assent to the other, given the intelligent nature of reason, he also claimed that the conflict could not be real, for that would imply that God would demand what is rationally impossible, namely assent to two rationally incompatible propositions. It is clear, then, that Aquinas placed the revealed doctrines as propositions to be assented to within the domain of rationality and subject to the laws of human reason created by God. This, of course, did not mean that some of the revealed doctrines were beyond the grasp of unassisted reason and, in this sense, suprarational, while others were rational in the sense of being within the possible grasp of unasisted reason.

"Suprarational," however, does not mean "irrational," that is, not susceptible of assent by reason because of its contradictory character.

We have not yet exhausted the rationality of the domain of faith as viewed by Aquinas. For not only did he consider certain revealed doctrines accessible to unassisted reason. Actually he considered some of the knowledge accessible to unassisted reason as the logically necessary condition for the assent to the revealed doctrines. The knowledge related in this way to the revealed doctrines he called " praeambula fidei ." Aquinas's paradigmatic example of a piece of knowledge accesible to unassisted reason so related to the revealed doctrines is the knowledge of God's existence. Why is this piece of knowledge a logically necessary condition for the assent to the revealed doctrines?

Suppose that God's existence were totally beyond the possible grasp of human reason left to its own devices. Then God's existence could be known only through God's revelation in a way that prompted assent to His existence. Suppose, however, that someone is persuaded of having received the revelation of the existence of an evil genius he calls God, much as Christians are persuaded of having received the revelation of the existence of the 'Christian' God, or as in the Guyana a few years ago certain people were persuaded of the existence of a god who demanded that they commit suicide. If it all is a matter of a feeling of persuasion, there is no way to discern the validity of the true faith from other faiths, and and the very attempt to do that is bound to failure, for if faith is just a matter of feeling that something is revealed no argument can attain faith. (Against this Schleirmacherian position--"fideisme sentimentaliste et subjectiviste condamné par Vatican I--see Debroglie, II, p. 164).

Faith is not like that, it has a "content" to be assented to, and this content may well be beyond reason but cannot be against reason, it has to cohere with what is accessible to reason nad to coincide with what is evident when reason works within its proper domain. Dor, in the first place, such is the nature of reason that it cannot assent to what contradicts what is evident to it.

Secondly, God who made us rational cannot possibly ask us to adhere to Him in a way that is incoherent with our rational nature by calling us to totally blind faith that leaves us at the mercy of feelings, or by asking us to assent to something that positively contradicts what is rationally evident. (The notion of "two truths" is untenable to rational creatures).  

Thus, there is a sense in which reason 'judges' revelation and is at least negatively supreme, not only autonomous within its own domain.

As is well known, in spite of, and perhaps in part due to, the constant interventions of religious authorities, in the subsequent centuries this trend toward the the affirmation of the independence of reason from faith gained incresed force. Two events in particular--Galileo's quarrel with the Italian Inquisition and the publication of The Origins of the Species --in which the evidential path of unassisted reason led to conclusions that contradicted what until then had been considered as doctrines of faith guaranteed by divine authority, and which resulted finally in the accommodation of the doctrines of faith to the conclusions reached by unassisted reason rather than the other way around, contrary to what Aquinas had clearly assumed that would and should happen, became for the majority of enlightened Christians the grain that definitively tipped the scales in favor of the absolute autonomy of reason and strongly contributed to detract from the authority of the Church in determining the content of faith.

Aquinas's rational psychology

Except, perhaps, for the issues concerning the will, Aquinas psychology is fundamentally Greek. Man is a rational animal. The fundamental difference between people and animals is that people are capable of grasping the truth and of acting on the basis of, and in accordance with, the truth they have grasped, thanks to their rational will. The grasp of the truth is an intellectual act. Because the union between the sould and the body is substantial, there is interaction between the two. Feeling is purely passive, a "passion," and proceeds from the body. It may interfere with the correct operation of the intellect, though by itself it is neither good nor bad. The remnants of Plato's intellectualism, his reduction of the good to the truth, of othopraxis to orthodoxia, of the supremacy of contemplation, are evident. They are filtered and partly corrected by Aristotle's hylemorphism. Also, they carry the mixed strands of Aristotle's speculative and practical reason. They are further completed by the notion of original sin which disturbs the proper relation between the intellect and the body and which primarily affects the will, not the intellect. (Notice that there are two kinds of decision: decision to assent when the intellect is not compelled, and decision to act. Aris knew nothing of the first).

Aquinas's epistemology

It is fundamentally Aristotelian. Truth is grasped by judging, an intellectual act. The intellect works on sense data but is abstractive because it aims at the intelligible. The proper object of the intellect is the intelligible in the sensible. It is of the nature of the intellect as such to assent when comeellign evidence of sufficient reason for affirming is grasped.

Aquinas's ontology is Aristotelian, not Platonic.

What is "reason"?

What are we talking about when whe speak of "reason"? This is my present question.

Sometimes we are speaking of the intellectual ability that distinguishes people from animals. Notice that to speak so one has to believe that people have the ability to grasp the intelligible in the sensible, and that animals do not. Saying therefore that faith or an act thereof is rational is saying that they fall under the category of acts or habits that involve primarily this intellectual ability found only in rational beings.

Sometimes we are speaking of the quality of the judgment as rationally grounded  or not by its object.

Sometimes we are speaking of the object judged, as having resulted or not from the grasp for sufficient reason for affirming. If the evidence of sufficient reason for affirming is compelling because of logical demonstration or "principles,"

the judgement is, in Aristotelian terms, rational and "scientific, " that is, universal and necessary valid, and its corresponding object is necessarily so as judged. This case applies only to intelligible objects, to  real or conceptual "natures." If the evidence of sufficient reason for affirming is compelling because of sensible presentation within adequate circumstances of perception, the judgment is rational but not scientific , and its object is true as affirmed. If the evidence for affirming is not compelling but only persuasive and the object is judged as probable, the judgment is rational but not scientific and its object is probably true as affirmed. If none of these, the judgment is simply irrational and its object not true as affirmed, though accidentally it may be as affirmed.

Given the intellectual nature of the intellect and its natural proportion to the merely intelligible in the sensible, the ideal of judgment is the scientific judgment. But, given the nature of reality which is not only intelligible but also sensible, the ideal judgment is not attainable in all matters, only in First Philosophy fully. Less fully in mathematics and physics. Even less fully in the case of particular objects as objects of contemplation (attribution of essence to this object). Never in the case of particular objects as objects of practical reason, as objects for response. (Yet, in all these cases, except the last, the sufficient reason looked for is reason for predicating affirmatively or negatively, that is, for having conceptualized the object the way one has done, whereas in the last case the reference is to decision and emotive action in response, oriented toward the future) .

Statements, which are the verbal, communicative expression of judgments, participate, as such , not as mere expressions of conceptualization, of the character of the judgments they express. And the same holds for syllogistically combined systems of statements. Therefore, they may be scientific or not scientific depending on their object (purely intelligible or intelligible in the sensible), and  rational and scientific, or rational but not scientific, or irrational but taken by one person for rational and by another (or by the same person later) for simply irrational. Therefore to say of the faith-statements that they are rational is to place them under the category of intellectual acts of judgment concerning objects of contemplative knowledge and resulting in mere assentful predication.

Clearly, now, practical judgments of particulars, which admittedly result in action in response, not in predication, cannot be rational in the same sense, if they are rational at all. Aris has a hard time classifying them (because of confusion of statements as objects for consideration and statements of objects for response). As intelligent-desire they do not belong, but his intellectualism forces him to plae them under the category of knoweldge and, therefore, rational. As for Aquinas, he sees the act of faith as speculative (not desirous), but the assent is granded on authority, not on evidence, and prompted by the will, not by the evidence. However, they have to be at least negatively credible (not contradictory in se, or evidently contrary to the evident, but rather "persuasively credible," that is, fitting with the evident if within the proper domain of reason, or not contradicting if beyond the proper domain). As for the "desirous" and active aspect of faith, the rôle of the will is to bring the action to conformity with the judgment, though it is rather difficult to grasp how a genuinely speculative judgment can be followed by an act in conformity or discomformity with it. (If I tell you that God revealed that "Christ rose from the dead," you may assent or dissent, but you cannot act in conformity or disconformity with it. How, then, could the will command an action in conformity with it? For Aris the problem is different, for practical understanding, when genuinely practical, is a moment of action, not a speculative judgment; the action is rational because the judgment is practical. His problem is that it is not intrinsically rational because action may or may not conform to the judgment but it has not the intrinsically rational character of judgments.

What is to be concluded? In the first place, that to speak of rational or irrational one needs a frame of reference, a context or constellation within which the terms acquire a precise signification. "Faith is rational." What does one mean by faith? What does one mean by rational? Faith is what people do in believing in God, and one does not expect from animals, plants, or inanimate things? But this is already understood by us, Westerners, within an Aristotelian-Thomistic constellation.

When we speak of faith and reason we allude to a contrast between the two. This contrast is of historical origin. For the Greeks, starting with Plato, either the religious truths were evident and reasonable or they were to be rejected; there was no possible contrast between faith and reaso. The contrast reached its full formulation and consecration in the 13th century with Aquinas and, fundamentally, as understood and defined by Aquinas, who characterized the act of faith and the act of reason by contrast to each other, one being a judgment prompted by authority, the other a judgment prompted by grasp of its evidence as Aristotle had understood it, both contributing to our knowledge of reality in a way inconceivable to Aristotle for whom only what fell within the field of evidential assent could be considered as rational and yield knowledge of reality. For Aquinas, though, the act of faith was rational, something that Aris would have denied.

(Herein lies one of the main ambiguities in Aquinas thought. For the act of faith to be rational, evidence of the authority of the Revealer is required--otherwise anything supposedly revealed would be accepted. Authority here means that the Revealer is reliable, otherwise the trust is irrational. But how can God's authority, who is not known before revelation, be established? It seems that this is the reason why Aquinas maintains that theexistence of an all-perfect Uncaused Cause can be established. But this creates a problem: faith becomes impossible unless the five ways or the ontological argument work; what if they don't, or if certain people cannot be persuaded by these arguments? Secondly, this makes faith ultimately dependent on reason rather than on God's authority, as Luther and Bart sensed. Furthermore ,

the reliability of the Revealer depends not only on his veracity and intellectual ability but is also related to the nature of his pronouncements. Hence the revealed truths have to cohere with the truths of reason, with what is evident to reason. This creates another problem: what if they don't, or they do not seem to?).

This is to say that "rational" meant something different for Aris and for Aquinas at least concerning the extension of the terms, but this included their meaning. The same applies to us after the advent of the scientific method which has become our paradigm of rationality. MacIntyre, therefore, had some reason to entitle one of his books Whose Reason?, What Rationality?

We are children of our Western culture with its historical understanding of rationality. For those of us who are Christians the quandary is hard. Being a Christian is rationally unjustified, unless God reveals nothing more or else than what can be evident to reason in matters related to God and morality, whichn is not the case with the Christian faith. Not only in other people's eyes but in our own, for it does not live up to the standards of reason as conceived by Aris, or by Aquinas himself, or by modern science. Thus, until we make persuasive to us and to others a different standard of rationality, we will be judged and judge ourselves by the available one. But is it possible? One thing is clear: we cannot start with definitions--with what I or you mean by faith or by reason or by rationality, not only because there is no possible agreement between believers and unbelievers, but because definitions are meaningful only within a paradigm, and what is to be transformed is the paradigm. Kuhn refuses to abandon the empiricist paradigm, in spite of its failures, supposedly because "it has served us so well." No, thereal reason is that we have nothing better. But can we have something better? That is the challenge.

A word on evidence

Evidence refers to statements. Socrates forced their interlocutors to make statements by asking them questions. Once they had made a statement, Socrates converted it into a proposition and showed that it lacked evidence to compell statement. What he was looking for was judgments compelled by evidence. (For Plato, led by Socrates, the evidence had to be essential, that is, evidence of what is so by nature and cannot possibly be otherwise. Hence the Forms. Hence Plato's despise of poetry and stories that state nothing).

Judgments work on concepts. But concepts do not predicate; the conceived is the merely understood in a particular way. By themselves they yield definitions of words, like dictionnaries. As abstracted from objects, however (like "bachelor" or "mother"), concepts may refer to objects. What the reflection that leads to judgment does is to ascertain whether there is sufficient reason for predication. For this it compares the object as present with the object as understood. In the case of "The present King of France" the comparison is not possible; it is a mere concept. In the case of Galileo's formula, the comparison is with all the hitherto observed falls, where the result is the same understood as previously. (The comparison is between what I understood previously and what I understand now for purposes of predication. If the understanding is the same, I state. If my statement leads you to the same understanding and predication, it is confirmed. What Galielo added was the experimental testing of the predictive capacity of the predicative judgment, unlike Socrates who worked backwards only and who proposed no new understanding of his own).

In this predicative process "evidence" appears. Where exactly, and evidence for what? Clearly evidence for the predication as predicated of object. But there is no evidence, properly speaking, for concept. I understand "slave" on the occasion of this man as belonging to his master. By reference to other cases I understand "slavery". I am not predicating anything. "Slave" and "slavery" are names of concetps, of what I have understood. I can check whether my understanding is correct by reviewing particular cases, but as yet I am predicating nothing. It is of my understanding as to be predicated of this and that and all those who belong to another human being, to a "master" that the reflection leading to judgment arises. It is at this point that "evidence" appears. The object as present counts as evidence for the object as understood and predicated by either supporting or not supporting the predicated as understood. When I make a statement expressing my judgment my predicated abstract concept refers my hearer to the object as conceived and predicated, and he will compare this object with the predicable concept I conveyed to him, and will agree or disagree depending on his understanding directed by my arguments pointing to the object.

From this the idea of truth as correspondence and of thought as image or mirror of reality arises. This idea, of course, works at best for the past up to the present, not for the future (unless supplemented by the notion of intelligible form which transforms the temporal into a-temporal).

This, roughly, is Aquinas's idea of knowledge and truth inherited from the Greeks. Knowledge, real knowledge, is grounded on compelling evidence. By contrast, as I explained above on p. 6, "For the exposed agent, not only the question of truth is not primary [for the agent is not about affirming ordenying], but it does not even arise... The agent does not assent to the fact that the Martians are there and thaty they are fearful; he 'knows' the Martians in fearing them and attempting to escapefrom them, as Nussbaum remarks concerning Hecuba's 'knowledge'. Fearing and acting consequently are not subsequent to knowing, they are constitutive of object for response by addressed agent. [Object  of contemplation is, rather, a post-factum abstraction from object for response, which deprives the latter from its properties related to exposure, and knowledge is the result to which this process leads]. A Martian who under appropriate circumstances of exposure iks not to be feared and escaped from is not a Martian."

What is the import of all this? That the Greek notion of knowledge is wrongheaded. It confuses what the contemplator does with what the agent does and attributes to the agent what the conemplator does. It confuses object for response (which, as Sartre says, is to be transcended as expressed by the gerundive) with object contemplated and reduces the former to the latter, which is not to be transcended. Thereby it severs the order of knowledge and truth from the order of action and desire, and gives the primacy to the former, with the resulting problem of the passage from fact to value. Once one starts this way, a paradigm is established. Thus the paradigm is to be shifted by starting not, as the Greeks, did with contemplative discourse about statements, but with "storical exposure" .

Statement and narration

The difficulty of shifting paradigms in this way lies in the fact that when we philosophize we are reflecting, not responding as exposed agents, and talking to other reflecting people, not to exposed agents. Thus what was object for response is now, for us, contemplated object to be understood. Is there a remedy for this?

It seems to me that the remedy lies in the general direction of narration and agent's imagination.

The Greeks started, as Socrates did, with statements of contemplators discussed among contemplators to find out whether they were true and necessarily so. Only on that basis could they act rationally. They assumed that they were reflecting on the knowledge of object possessed by the ideal rational agent. In other words, they assumed that the exposed agent was related to the object that they contemplated, to the object as contemplated.

And that the agent had to know the object as they did in order to respond to it.

These assumptions are wrong, as already explained. The agent perceives the object as to be transcended, gerundively. The logic of agency is dramatic, towards an uncertain future as to be brought about. This future may be totally imposed by the object as the goal to be pursued under the circumstances, or leave some or much initiative to the agent. Only narration replicates this situation. And because of this, thanks to our exposed agent's imagination, it keeps alive for the hearers the emotive element of action, which is absent from the contemplator's statements. Therefore, narration seems to be the appropriate medium for our understanding of the agent and of the world.

What can this medium yield, philosophically?

In general, a reflective realization of the exposed, dramatic structure of our lives in the world to which we are exposed. At least this can be shared by all reflective humans who use their exposed agent's imagination. This, I believe, is what MacIntyre had in mind when he spoke of the narrative character of human life. "Realistic narratives," as Frei calls them, provide the possibility of this realization, which is impossible if we start with contemplator's statements.

The above has to do with the dramatic structure of stories and the correlative dramatic structure of our lives. But there is no story without ' content ' as there is no symphonic structure without actual music. Imaginary and real stories have the same dramatic structure without which they are not stories, as symphonies have the same structure without which they are not symphonies. Yet we situate ourselves automatically in relation to realistic stories as "real" or "imaginary." The same with plays which are 'present', which leave less to the imagination and which do not automatically separate the hearer from the events by "once upon a time." The stories we take for real 'address' us in a different way related to exposure, depending on our 'proximity' to them. ( Think of the stories told in Alcoholic Anonymous , and of Hamlet's uncle reaction to the play mounted by Hamlet). Whether realistic stories are taken for real or as imaginary depends, at least partly, on their content in relation to the world's experience of the hearer. Anyone can take the biblical story of David's adultery for real, but not anyone can take the story of Abraham's sacrifice for real--as belonging to the past, much less to his or her past. Clearly, our 'world's experience' includes what can and what cannot happen, what is likely and unlikely to happen, and is to a large extent (and to a full extent initially) culturally loaded. The point I am driving at is that stories cannot, as such, take us beyond the common realization of the human situation. There is not to be expected that we will hear them, that is, situate ourselves in relation to them, in the same way ifwe belong to different cultures, or that we can solve our disagreements of this nature by discussion, philosophical or otherwise. Is this too little?

Too little or too much, it is what is available to us. But, as it is, it yields considerable results. In the first place, it can cure us from our wrongheaded hellenism that leads to "scientism," that creates silly philosophical conundrums, that displaces the humanities to a limbo, that misleads us to look for solutions in directions where they cannot be found, that subjectivizes emotions, that forces the faithful to a futile apologetic of the rationality of their faith, etc.

In the second place, it makes it possible for us faithful to practice our faith in patience and tolerance, instead of brandishing our truth as the truth, the rational or even demonstrable truth. For we share sufficiently with all others the human situation to understand the predicament of those who do not share our faith.

In the third place, it gives us faithful a chance to appreciate wht is given us in faith and the difference it makes.

We are the people who can live life in hope and trust, as saved. This is why, when actually confrontedwith the tragedy of death and with ultimate despair, those who do not believe genuinely envy us, either secretly or openly. This brings to the fore the importance of witnessing rather than of mere talking or rebuking or attempting to give proofs.

But what about relativism and the rationality of our faith?

Are we to say that any position is as good as any other, and that

any religious charlatan deserves credence? This would be like saying that because there is no way of demonstrating 'objectively' the point, any piece of music or of literature is as good as any other, and any way of living is as good as any other. There is such a thing as human growth. There is such a thing as a way of living that is more in harmony with our human needs and desires than others, that helps us cope better with the human predicament than others, that is more 'salvific' than others. Husserl wrote something to the effect that no Westerner is willing to indianize himself or herself in matters of science, whereas many indians ar willing to westernize themselves in these matters. The same can be said in matters of religion, for not all religions have the virtuality of producing people and social arrangements that are equally desirable in human terms. Of course, this can lead us only up to a certain point in religious matters. As the Greek gods died of their own weight, so other gods. But the real proof of the cake is in the eating, not in the mere connoisseur's appreciation. Hence the importance of witnessing.

As for religious charlatans, compare the way they live as witnesses and what they offer with Buddha, with Moses, with Mohammed, with Jesus. And compare pre-prophetic, regional Judaism to post-prophetic, universal Judaism. And compare the authority with which the founders speak. And compare the adaptability of their ways of life to different historical epochs and cultures.

There is a difference between a Guyanna religious chieftain and a Jesus or a Buddha. And a difference between a Buddha and a Jesus.

Only the latter can qualify, hypothetically, with the God who puts us through suffering and death without any explanation but who shares with us suffering and death and promises resurrection.

( Notice that only through stories about the founders can we come to know them as characters, as witnesses. And that not all the stories told are "realistic stories" with historical "traces" ).

Conclusions in preparation for \WP\chantill\aug92-1

Two possible lines of approach emerge from this paper:  (1) The Greek conception of rationality : From Socrates (statements and definitions) to Plato's Forms, to Aris's immanent Forms. The crisis in practical reason without Forms: inferior kind of knowledge (less "akribós"). Aquinas and the problem of faith and reason.

(2) The "category mistake" with which I started this paper (Orson Wells).

Probably an impressionist mixture of the two as an introduction.

(3) The shift from speculative to practical reason: What was involved there?

THIS # 3 IS THE LINE I WILL PURSUE IN \WP\CHANTILL\AUG92-1.   
