---
title: "92-SEP-4"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/92-SEP-4.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


\wp\chantill\sept92-3                   September 24, 92
                       FAITH AS CHRISTIAN WISDOM
      For  Aristotle,  to  use  Nussbaum's  compact  characterization,  "the
appropriate criterion of correct choice is a  thoroughly  human  being,  the
person of practical wisdom."[?] Obviously, however, the person chosen  as  a
model of  correct  choice  by  Aristotle  would  be  the  person  judged  by
Aristotle as  possessing  practical  wisdom,  as  making  the  choices  that
Aristotle considers correct. Now, from Aristotle's  Politics  we  well  know
that he not only would not have judged wise a person  who  would  choose  to
accord women the right to vote or to enfranchise the slaves, who  were  born
to be led by those  whom  nature  predestined  to  be  free,  but  he  would
actually have deemed that person to be sorely lacking in  practical  wisdom.
On the other hand, an overwhelming majority of us, I  think,  would  discard
from our list of people possessing practical wisdom  anybody  who  made  the
two mentioned choices which Aristotle judged wise.
      Who is right: Aristotle or ourselves? Of course, we have no  doubt  as
to who is right. But Aristotle and his peers in  the  Athenian  society  did
not either. Thus, our assurance cannot be taken for  the  guarantee  of  the
correctness of our choices and the incorrectness of  Aristotle's.  Moreover,
if  Aristotle happens to be right in his  claim  that  concerning  practical
wisdom the appropriate criterion is the person of  practical  wisdom,  which
entails the circularity that the person of practical wisdom is the one  each
of us judges to  possess  practical  wisdom,  then  there  seems  to  be  no
reasonable hope to get out of the Babel Tower in which  we  are  in  ethical
matters, that is, in matters of wisdom. (In fact, I  think  that  we  cannot
get out of the Babel Tower by purely linguistic  means,  that  is,  by  pure
argument. Perhaps "witnessing" can do the trick in the long run). It  seems,
therefore,  important  to  find  out  whether  Aristotle  is  right  in  his
criterion to determine the person of practical wisdom.
Socrates and practical knowledge
      Ironically, philosophy--the search for  wisdom--started  precisely  as
an attempt to settle disagreements in matters of wisdom and in the  hope  of
finding the rational way  out  from  the  Babel  Tower.  I  say  ironically,
because, as I will attempt to show in this paper, if  Aristotle  happens  to
be right in his criterion of practical wisdom, then philosophy  completed  a
full circle with Aristotle and found itself again exactly at  its  point  of
departure.
      The Athenians, no less than us  today  in  this  contentious  American
society, differed in their choices and, like most of  us,  considered  their
choices to be models of practical wisdom. In the  then  reigning  confusion,
not much different from ours, there were people who not  only  assumed  that
they were themselves in their decisions models of practical wisdom, as  most
of us do, but even claimed to be capable of  teaching  practical  wisdom  to
the youth. It was to  debunk  these  pretentions  to  wisdom  that  Socrates
devoted his life by showing these people that they  could  not  possibly  be
wise, much less capable of teaching wisdom to others,  since  they  did  not
even know what wisdom was. For, at least according  to  Socrates,  only  the
person who knows what wisdom  is  can  be  genuinely  wise  and  capable  of
teaching wisdom to others. Socrates at least knew that he did not know,  and
to this extent--but only to this extent--he considered  himself  wiser  than
other people.
      Socrates' approach is well known. He asked his opponents, who  claimed
to know about the right course of action, for  a  definition  of  what  they
knew, and then proceeded maieutically to show them that they  did  not  know
what  they  pretended  to  know.  The  Euthyphro  is  a  beautiful  example.
Euthyphro implicitly assumes that  he  possesses  at  least  one  aspect  of
practical wisdom, namely, piety. However, with great  skill,  humor,  irony,
and even compassion, Socrates brings him to the realization that  he  cannot
be in his actions an exemplar of piety or even correctly judge who is  pious
since he does not know what piety is. Indeed, how can any  person  be  taken
as an exemplar of piety if neither the person who is  supposedly  pious  nor
those who judge him or her pious know what piety is?
       If only Socrates could have reached the knowledge he was looking  for
or somebody else could have shared that knowledge with him,  then  he  would
have been wise and a model of wisdom and able to  judge  who  was  genuinely
wise. Alas! Socrates' life ended in the same way as the Euthyphro ends  when
Euthyphro leaves him:
      "By going you have cast me down from a great hope I had, that I  would
      learn from you the nature of the pious and the impious and  so  escape
      Meletus'indictment by showing him that I had acquired wisdom in divine
      matters from Euthyphro, and my ignorance would no longer cause  me  to
      be careless and inventive about such  things,  and  that  I  would  be
      better for the rest of my life."[?]
      Socrates, then, died without knowing what wisdom is.  However,  unlike
most of us, who assume that our own choices are models of  practical  wisdom
while  the  choices  of  those  who  choose   differently   are   wrong--our
differences with Aristotle concerning women  and  slaves  being  a  case  in
point--, Socrates died knowing and publicly avowing that  he  did  not  know
and that at least to this extent, though onlyto this extent,  he  was  wise,
as the oracle of Delphos had recognized him to be.
      It would be a mistake, however, to think that Socrates'quest
for wisdom ended in total failure. For Socrates left a legacy. He  may  have
failed to reach his goal, but he was no sceptic. Indeed,  Socrates  did  not
die proclaiming that the wisdom he had searched  for  was  unknowable;  only
that he and the people he had cross-examined had failed  to  reach  it.  And
not only did he spend his life  trying  to  reach  that  knowledge,  however
elusive, but he proclaimed that the unexamined life was  not  worth  living.
And while submitting himself to the law in his trial,  he  refused  to  take
the Athenian law for  the  ultimate  standard  and  implicitly  appealed  to
wisdom as the universal law for human conduct. In this sense,  Socrates  may
rightly be said to have opened a particular way to look for the way  out  of
the Babel Tower, namely, philo-sophia, the rational  search  for  wisdom,  a
search  which  relies  not  on  custom  or  authority--not  even  the  gods'
authority, for the gods of a  land  are  just  a  component  of  custom  and
therefore vary with the customs of the land--but on the compelling force  of
evidence exclusively.
Plato and practical knowledge
      Plato, Socrates' most distinguished  disciple,  pursued  his  master's
quest for wisdom, while giving to the rational  character  of  the  quest  a
more definite structure.  In  cross-examining  his  opponents  Socrates  had
implicitly assumed and brought them to assume that knowing  what  wisdom  is
either amounts to being wise or is at least the indispensable condition  for
being wise. Furthermore, in convincing his opponents of  ignorance  Socrates
had relied in their incapacity to provide a definition of wisdom or  of  the
aspect of wisdom which they claimed to know and to be  capable  of  teaching
others. Euthyphro's  successive  definitions  of  piety  had  left  Socrates
dissatisfied because they did not made compellingly evident  what  piety  is
in itself and, therefore,, what acting piously amounts to in all  cases,  at
all times ,in all places and circustances. Clearly, then, what Socrates  had
looked for was the knowledge of what is good by its very  nature,  the  good
whose goodnes does not depend on the custom of this or  that  land,  on  the
whim of this or that individual, on the concrete circumstances  that  obtain
here or there  at  this  or  at  another  time,  for  only  such  knowledge,
expressed in a universal and exceptional definition, could  lead  people  to
act in the right way and put an end to their  disagreements  in  matters  of
wisdom.
      This is the clue that Plato took from Socrates and  that  led  him  to
his theory of the Forms. For finding  in  the  realm  of  the  temporal  and
mutable no firm basis for the universal and eternally valid  knowledge  that
was required, Plato was led to  postulate  as  necessary  the  existence  of
eternal and immutable Forms by reference to  which  the  strictly  universal
truth of the knowledge of natures--be it  the  nature  of  the  good  or  of
anything else--was to be  validated.  Because  of  its  intrinsic  nobility,
Plato placed at the top of the hierarchy of the Forms the Form of the  Good,
by the knowledge of which the choices of the  wise  are  to  be  determined,
identified wisdom with the intuitive contemplation  of  the  Good,  reserved
that  intuitive  knowledge  to  the  lovers  of   wisdom,   that   is,   the
philosophers, and hoped for the time when philosophers would  be  kings  and
the Babel Tower would be substituted for the well ordered republic.
      Alas! again, the rational quest for wisdom did not  come  to  fruition
with Plato. In fact, the theory of the Forms, at least as far  as  the  Form
of the Good is concerned, was already outspent during Plato's own  life,  as
shown by his middle and late dialogues. But someone  again  was  to  inherit
the Socratic project,  this  time  through  Plato's  mediation  and  in  the
significantly modified shape  that  Plato  had  given  it.  For  Plato  had,
indeed, significantly modified the rational quest for wisdom inaugurated  by
Socrates. How so?
      Socrates' original quest had been quest for practical  knowledge.  His
predecessors, the so-called pre-Socratic philosophers,  from  whom  Socrates
explicitly distanced himself, Socrates concern was not with theoretical  but
with  practical  knowledge,  not  with  the  knowledge  of  'nature'  or  of
'reality' in general but with the knowledge of what  is  good,  of  what  is
right, of what is just, of what ought to determine the choices of people  if
people were to make the correct choices and to securely agree on  them  with
each other. It is true, however, that since Socrates himself seems  to  have
come to identify practical wisdom  with  the  knowledge  of  the  nature  of
wisdom or at least to make of it the necessary condition for being wise,  he
may very well have led his followers to think that the Good had a nature  of
its own which was to be known in the same way  as  the  nature  of  anything
else. In any case, such was the direction followed by Plato,  for  whom  the
Form of the Good was to be known by the same intuitive contemplation as  any
other Form, though the Good had a unique capacity to provoke a  love  of  or
attraction to  it  that  no  other  Form  produced.  In  this  way,  perhaps
unwittingly, Plato definitively conflated practical knowledge, that is,  the
ability to make correct choices, with theoretical knowledge,  that  is,  the
knowledge of the realities of 'nature'. In  other  words,  with  Plato,  the
practical sophia in quest  of  which  Socrates  had  started  became  either
identical  in  kind  with  the  theoretical  sophia  of  the   Pre-socratics
interested in the knowledge of the universe, or at least subordinated as  to
its necessary condition to a theoretical sophia or knowledge of  the  nature
of the good. Such was  the  conflated  view  of  theoretical  and  practical
knowledge that Aristotle inherited from his master  and  that,  as  we  will
see, was to plague him.
Aristotle and practical knowledge
      As is well known, one of the  important  modifications  introduced  by
Aristotle into the Platonic legacy was to bring the Forms from  their  ideal
heaven back into the temporal universe under the  shape  of  the  nature  or
essence of the realities by which this universe is constituted.  A  second--
and  for  our  purposes  more  important--modification  is  the  distinction
introduced by  Aristotle  between  theoretical  and  practical  sophia.  For
Aristotle, the strictly universal knowledge of natures is  the  business  of
theoretical  intelligence,  whose  aim  is  to  understand   reality.   This
knowledge, when achieved or insofar  as  it  is  achieved,  constitutes  the
theoretical sophia for which the Pre-socratics were obscurely  looking,  and
which Aristotle calls episteme, scientific knowledge. As for  the  practical
knowledge concerning correct action, in search of which Socrates  spent  his
life, Aristotle reserves for  it  the  name  of  sophia,  as  distinct  from
episteme. In this way Aristotle neatly distinguished and  separated  as  two
different things the practical wisdom that  Plato  had  reduced  to,  or  at
least conflated to an extent with, the theoretical knowledge of natures.
      In the  Nicomachean  Ethics  in  particular  Aristotle  indicates  the
interweaving lines of thinking that led  him  to  this  distinction  between
episteme and sophia, that is, between theoretical and  practical  knowledge.
One direction of this thinking has to do  with  the  intrinsically  relative
character of the good, which is incompatible  with  Plato's  notion  of  the
good. Plato's Form of  the  Good  presupposes  that  the  good  is  one  and
universal and immutable. Even if we accept that what we are looking  for  in
the quest for practical wisdom is exclusively what  is  good  for  us  human
beings,  we  should  not  expect  in  this  matter,  the  kind   of   strict
universality and necessity characteristic of episteme, for what is  possible
in the field of  theoretical  knowledge  that  deals  with  natures  is  not
possible in the  field  of  practical  knowledge  that  deals  with  action.
Indeed, human actions always take place in particular circumstances and  are
about particular goods. In order to act appropriately the  wise  person  has
to take those particulars into account, for the course  of  action  that  is
good or wise in a particular circumstance is not necessarily  good  or  wise
in another circumstance. To aim, therefore, in practical matters  of  action
and what is good at the kind of  strictly  universal  and  necessarily  true
knowledge that is possible only in the realm of episteme, as Socrates  seems
to have done and Plato certainly did, is unreasonable. What we look for  and
can attain when we search for practical knowledge is  not  episteme  (exact,
scientific knowledge) but sophia, that is, wisdom, prudential knowledge.
      The extent  to  which  episteme--necessarily  true  knowledge  of  the
essential nature of things, resulting from apodictic  evidence--is  actually
possible in the theoretical field, once the Platonic Forms are brought  back
from the eternal realm and submitted  to  the  conditions  of  our  temporal
universe, is certainly disputable. But my concern here  is  with  the  other
portion of the Aristotelian legacy  which  he  clearly  separated  from  the
former,  namely,  sophia,  practical  knowledge.  Did  Aristotle,  once   he
dispelled  Plato's  confusion  of  practical  knowledge   with   theoretical
knowledge, attain, or at least open the way for us to attain, the wisdom  to
which Socrates had so ardently aspired?
      It seems to me that in the Nicomachean Ethics  Aristotle  is  carrying
at the same time, and confusing them, two  different  though  not  unrelated
projects. One of them concerns the agent and the  agent's  actions  and  the
good for humans as objects of theoretical knowledge. The other concerns  the
agent and the agent's actions insofar as the agent  himself  or  herself  is
involved in acting,  which  is--to  use  Aristotle's  nomenclature--prctical
knowledge. I will begin with the latter, since after all we are  considering
Aristotle's success in satisfying Socrates' concern.
      According to  Aristotle,  the  human  agent,  unlike  the  animal  and
insofar as he or she acts as a human agent, has no  predetermined  responses
but, instead, deliberates, chooses, and acts. Now, the agent's  deliberation
consists in the application of certain quasi-universal pieces  of  knowledge
to  the  particular  case  with  which  the  agent  finds  him  or   herself
confronted. These are only quasi-universals because they work only as  rules
of thumb rather than as precise rules. And they work only as rules of  thumb
rather than universals that apply strictly to  the  particulars  covered  by
them because actions are  particular,  in  that  agents  act  in  particular
circumstances, and in  different  circumstances  different  actions  may  be
appropriate. It is, therefore, the inescapable responsibility  of  the  free
agent to determine which rule applies to the particular  case  and  to  what
extent, in order to regulate his or her action by that standard.
      This seems to be the gist of Aristotle's understanding  of  the  human
agent. Now, this Aristotelian understanding is an instance  of  theoretical,
not of practical, knowledge. What Aristotle has here understood  and  shared
with us is the essential nature of  human  agency  as  human--regardless  of
whether Aristotle's understanding is correct or  not.  In  so  far  as  this
understanding is correct, it applies strictly to all cases of  human  agency
as human (which amounts to saying that  it  is  universal)  and  it  applies
necessarily since it is understanding  of  the  essential  nature  of  human
agency as human. These are the characteristics of epistéme,  of  theoretical
knowledge, not of practical knowledge.
      That this piece of the Aristotelian Ethics is not practical  knowledge
is made evident by the fact that neither does  the  agent  need  to  possess
this knowledge in order to act, nor does the  possession  or  lack  of  this
knowledge affect in any way the agent's actions. If  Aristotle  analysis  of
the human agent is correct, when involved in action people  deliberate--that
is, consider which rule of thumb to apply to the  particular  case,  and  to
what extent, in order to choose their action, and then act accorgingly.  But
for this they, that is, the agents do not need  to  know  that  deliberation
consists in finding out which rule of thumb to apply to the particular  case
and to what extent to employ it, anymore than to utter a correct sentence  a
speaker of English needs to know which grammatical rule or rules he  or  she
is applying, or even that he or she is applying certain  grammatical  rules.
[?] Now, if what Aristotle offers us in his analysis of human  agency  is  a
piece of theoretical knowledge, at least  this  aspect  of  the  Nicomachean
Ethics cannot be said to yield any  knowledge  of  the  practical  kind  for
which Socrates was looking in his quest and for which Aristotle  himself  is
supposedly looking in that  work.  Where,  then,  does  genuinely  practical
knowledge appear in the Nicomachean Ethics, if not in the analysis of  human
agency?
      Most certainly, there is in that Aristotelian  work  no  list  of  the
rules of thumb that the wise agent employs in his or her deliberations.  Why
there is no such list we will understand later.
      As far as practical knowledge is concerned, there  are  two  important
pieces in the NE.  First,  there  is  Aristotle's  reasoned  answer  to  the
question of what genuine human happiness, that is, the good at  which  human
actions  should  aim,   consists   in.   Second,   there   is   a   reasoned
characterization of the intellectual and moral virtues that the wise  person
needs to possess to act wisely.
      Why does Aristotle want to  find  out  what  genuine  human  happiness
consists in? Because it seems to him that to be a good person,  that  is,  a
wise agent, amounts to being thoroughly human,  that  is,  to  incarnate  in
one's actual life as full a realization as possible of the teleology of  our
humanness. An excellent shoemaker is a shoemaker that incarnates in  his  or
her shoemaking
as full  a  realization  of  the  teleology  of  shoemaking  as  is  humanly
possible. Similarly, the intrinsic teleology of the human being as human  is
to attain genuine happiness,  that  is,  the  happiness  that  befits  human
beings by virtue of their being human  rather  than  animals  or  angels  or
anything else. Thus the wise person will be the person who conducts  his  or
her deliberation and makes his or her decisions in such a way as  to  attain
genuine human happiness insofar as it  depends  on  him  or  her.  In  other
words, from the investigation of what genuine human happiness  is  Aristotle
expects to get the ultimate norm by reference to  which  people  can  become
wise, and by reference to which those who  are  actually  wise--and  in  the
measure in which they are wise--conduct themselves in their actions.
      Aristoteles' reasoned answer to this question is the following:
      "... we shall find the best good if we first find the  function  of  a
human bweing" (1097b25). Since  what  distinguishes  the  human  being  from
plants and animals is reason, the function of the human being "is some  sort
of life of action of the [part of the soul] that has reason" (1098a1).
      " (a) We have found, then, that  the  human  function  is  the  soul's
      activity that expresses reason [as itself having reason]  or  requires
      eason. Now, the function of F, e. g. of a  harpist,  is  the  same  in
      kind, some say, as the function of an excellent F, e.g.  an  excellent
      harpist. (c) The same is true unconditionally in every case,  when  we
      add to the  function  the  superior  achievement  that  expresses  the
      virtue; for a harpist's function, e.g. is to play the harp, and a good
      harpist's is to do it well. Now we take the human  function  to  be  a
      certain kind of life, and take this life to be the soul's activity and
      actions  that  express  reason.  (e)  [Hence  by  (c)  and  (d)]   the
      excellent's man's function is to do this finely  and  well.  (f)  Each
      function is completed well when its completion  expresses  the  proper
      virtue. (g) Therefore [by (d), (e) and (f)] the human good  turns  out
      to be the soul's activity that expresses virtue" (1098a 7-17).
      Thus, according to Aristotle, the person whose life  expresses  virtue
possesses the main component of a happy life, for "the  things  that  please
lovers  of  what  is  fine  are  things  pleasant  by  nature;  and  actions
expressing virtue are pleasant in this way; and so they both  please  lovers
of what is fine and are pleasant in themselves. Hence their  life  does  not
need pleasure to be added" (1099a11-16).
      However, the soul's activity that expresses virtue, which  corresponds
to the intrinsic teleology of  the  human  being  as  such,  constitutes  an
essential component of happiness but does not by itself  suffice  for  being
happy. The reason is that we human beings have  material  and  other  needs,
such as the needs for
food,  shelter,   love,   friendship,   etc.,   without   whose   reasonable
satisfaction we cannot be happy and which  at  least  to  a  certain  extent
depend on fortune rather than on our efforts. Thus Aristotle concludes:
      "Then why not say that the happy person expresses complete  virtue  in
      his activities, with an adequate supply of external  goods,  not  just
      for a time but for a complete life? Or should we add that he will also
      go on living this way and will  come  to  an  appropriate  end?"  (EN,
      1101a15).
      Fortune, of course, may not always favor  those  whose  lives  express
virtue, that is, who are excellent in that their actions are  in  accordance
with reason. However, even when deprived of "the  goods  of  the  body"  and
"the external goods" (see  1098b14-15),  they  will  nonetheless  enjoy  the
supreme satisfaction of acting virtuously, which is  "pleasant  by  nature."
And since fortune  does  not  depend  on  us  and  is  beyond  our  control,
"political science," that is the science that teaches  the  members  of  the
polis to be excellent human beings, has to devote "most  of  its  attention"
not to the goods that depend  on  fortune  but  "to  the  character  of  the
citizens" (10099b30-31).
      Let us pause here and again ask ourselves whether  what  Aristotle  is
offering us here is a piece of theoretical  or  of  practical  knowledge.  A
first reason to think that in this case the knowledge involved is  practical
is the kind of result aimed at  by  Aristoteles  in  his  argumentation.  As
Aristotle himself remarks concerning the difference between theoretical  and
practical knowledge, "the carpenter's and  the  geometer's  inquiries  about
the right angle are different...; the carpenter's is confined to  the  right
angle's usefulness for his work, whereas the geometer's  concerns  what,  or
what sort of thing,  the  right  angle  is,  since  he  studies  the  truth"
(1098a29-30). In other words, the  geometer's  fundmental  intention  is  to
find  the  truth  concerning  the  right  angle.  Hence,  his   search,   if
successful, terminates in assent to the truth discovered. By  contrast,  the
carpenter's fundamental intention  by  which  his  search  is  inspired  and
shaped is to find what concerning the right angle is useful for  his  craft.
Now, not only may this intention filter out  certain  spects  of  the  truth
that are not useful for the carpenter's craft, but, in addition,  since  the
carpenter is not primarily interested in the truth per se, his  search  does
not terminate in assent but in correctly applying  the  knowledge  acquired.
This is to say that the knowledge acquired by the carpenter is reflected  in
the product to whose improvement it contributes, which is not the case  with
the geometer's knowledge that is purely theoretical or  contemplative.  And,
indeed, the knowledge furnished by Aristotle's analysis of the  function  or
natural teleology of the human being as such seems to be of the kind of  the
carpenter's knowledge, for its point is not merely to bring us to assent  to
what Aristotle sees as the truth concerning that teleology but  to  lead  us
to live in accordance with that teleology. Such, in fact, is the very  point
of Aristotle's whole inquiry in the NE.  For,  as  he  says  concerning  the
importance of the science of the highest good,
      "Then surely knowledge of this good is also of  great  importance  for
      the conduct of our lives, and if, like archers, we have  a  target  to
      aim at, we are more likely to hit the right mark. If so, we should try
      to grasp, in outline at any rate, what the good is" (1094a24-25).
      The person, then, who has grasped in outline that the function of  the
human being is to live virtuously, that is, to express  rationality  in  his
or her actions by doing what is virtuous, and that this  will  lead  him  or
her to at least the form of happiness found in what is pleasant  by  nature,
seems to have  received  from  Aristotle  a  piece  of  genuinely  practical
knowledge, for this person has a definite target to aim at.
      A secondary reason to think that Aristotle's  analysis  of  the  human
teleology  constitutes  a  piece  of  practical  rather   than   theoretical
knowledge is that this piece  does  not  possess  the  qualities  of  strict
universality  and  necessity   characteristic   of   episteme.   Geometrical
theorems, for instance, exhibit those qualities, at least inasmuch as  human
knowledge is likely to possess them. In geometry it is a  matter  of  strict
demonstration (however aided the demonstration may  be,  as  underscored  by
Kant,  by  sensory  intuition).  Disagreement  about  the  validity  of  the
knowledge that the sum of the angles of a triangle amounts to  two  straight
angles is inconceivable, and so is the suspicion that any exception will  or
can be found  to  that  piece  ofknowledge.  Clearly,  however,  Aristotle's
argumentation concerning the natural teleology of the human  being  is  only
true, as he himself might say, "for the most part."  But what does "for  the
most part" mean here? It certainly does  not  mean  that  he  considers  the
result of his analysis of the natural teleology of the  human  being  partly
true and partly false. Indeed, Aristotle considers it quite true, worthy  of
unreserved assent, as much as he considers true and  worthy  of  assent  the
result of his analysis  of  deliberation,  decision  and  action.  He  might
concede that his analysis is 'inexact,' in that it can be  brought  to  more
exactness, but not that his analysis is wrong or even  partly  wrong.  Thus,
what "true for the most part" would  mean  here,  if  indeed  Aristotle  had
applied this expression to the analysis to which I am referring, is that  it
is true but not  strictly  demonstrable.  In  other  words,  this  piece  of
knowledge has the quality of universality, in that it applies to  all  human
beings without exception by virtue of their nature, but  its  necessity  can
not be strictly demonstrated, for the argumentation on which it is based  is
at best persuasive. By the same token,  if  my  interpretation  is  correct,
Aristotle would  grant  that,  since  his  own  analysis  is  not  a  strict
demonstration, certain people might not be persuaded  by  his  analysis  and
that, at least conceivably, he himself might be  persuaded  by  an  analysis
that leads to a different conclusion, .
      Two points.  Comparison  with  the  analysis  of  decision,  where  no
passion is involved and assent  is  simpler,  a  matter  of  experience  and
understanding. Secondly, example  of  somebody  who  would  defend  physical
pleasure or power and money, and example of akrasia.
       But  why  is  Aristotle's  analysis  merely  persuasive  rather  than
strictly demonstrable? In other words, why in the matters  of  human  action
that fall under ethics "exact" (akribos),  strictly  demonstrable  knowledge
is not possible whereas, say, in geometry it  is?  The  answer  is  complex.
Concerning the sum of the angles of a triangle the  demonstration  is  based
on a diagram which provides the evidence. In this  case,  both  teacher  and
disciple  share  the  same  referential  basis,  namely,  the  diagram.  But
concerning the natural teleology of the human being the case  is  different.
Here the referent is Aristotle's own  sedimented  experience  as  an  agent.
How, for instance, does Aristotle know that acting virtuously leads  to  the
special pleasure that accrues to what is "pleasant by  nature"?  Because  he
himself has experienced that pleasure  in  acting  virtuously,  that  is  in
choosing and doing the humanly  appropriate  action  even  when  it  is  not
rewarded by any other pleasure. But how can he appeal to that  when  talking
to a person who is not virtuous and has never experienced the pleasure  that
accrues to what is pleasant by nature? Aristotle acknowledges  that  he  can
not, and this is why he demands that the youth be  trained  or  educated  or
habituated to do what is appropriate for a human being to do, so  that  they
become capable later, as autonomous agents,  to  choose  by  themselves  the
right course of action.
      Suppose, however, that a person was habituated in a culture  in  which
acquiring and possessing money and power are identified with happiness.  Not
only has this person never experienced the pleasure that accrues to what  is
pleasant by  nature,  and  therefore  cannot  be  persuaded  by  Aristotle's
argument, but insofar as this person identifies being  happy  with  pursuing
and obtaining money and power  this  person  will  aim  in  his  actions  at
acquiring money and power. And, if Aristotle had grown up in  this  culture,
Aristotle would be this person and  would  have  written  a  very  different
Nicomachean Ethics with as much conviction as he wrote  the  one  he  wrote.
(It seems, therefore,  that  the  "moral"  virtues  precede  and  shape  the
"intellectual" virtues that supposedly discover and apply  the  standard  by
which actions are chosen and judged and  by  which  the  moral  virtues  are
supposedly defined as virtues).
      But don't we have the case of the  akratic  person?  And  is  not  the
akratic person one who intellectually recognizes the  natural  teleology  of
the human being without having the moral strength to live by it? And  cannot
we interpret the akratic person  as  a  person  of  any  culture  who,  when
confronted  with   Aristotle's   argumentation   in   the   NE,   would   be
intellectually persuaded because Aristotle's analysis  is  the  correct  one
that transcends all cultures, without however having  the  strength  to  use
this as the standards for his or her actions? I do not  think  so,  for  the
very  same  reason  that  Aristotle  excludes  the  inexperienced  youth  as
incapable of ethical--or, as he would say, "political"--judgment. Indeed,  a
person habituated in a culture different from  Aristotle's  cannot  possibly
identify as happiness what Aristotle does, for this person  has  experienced
the satisfactions that accrue to the pursuit and  possession  of  money  and
power, but not the satisfaction that accrues to  what  Aristotle  identifies
as acting virtuously.
      But  why,  then,  could  any  mature  person  agree  with  Aristotle's
analysis of deliberation, decision, and conduct, and not with  his  analysis
of happiness? Because the former is purely abstract  in  the  sense  of  not
involving any substantive claim concerning  the  good,  whereas  the  latter
involves  very substantive claims concerning the good. One thing is  to  say
"Because you are a human being you deliberate, choose, and conduct  yourself
according to your choice," quite another to say "Because  you  are  a  human
being you ought to aim at what I judge to constitute human  happiness."  The
fact is that all our conceptions of happiness are shaped  by  and  dependent
on our cultural habituation. Moreover, our habituation  is  not  theoretical
but practical. It trains us to desire and aim at certain goods as the  real,
the intrinsically  preferable  goods,  to  the  point  that  we  cannot  see
different goods as the real goods because we cannot desire  them  as  goods.
Goods are not concepts. A good functions as a good  not  insofar  as  it  is
theoretically defined but insofar as it motivates the  agent  to  act.  What
Aristotle gives us in his NE is what he considers desirable and,  therefore,
wise to pursue. But the extent to which this is shaped  by  the  culture  in
which Aristotle was habituated shows in the fact that  Aristotle  would  not
have enfranchised women and  slaves,  and  would  have  judged  very  unwise
anybody who did or  attempted  to  do  that.  The  character  of  obligation
involved in Aristotle's NE--a wise person  ought  to  desire  this  form  of
happiness--results simply from the fact that  such  is  the  happiness  that
Aristotle has been habituated  to  desire  that  and,  consequently,  judges
desirable and to be desired.
      But why, then,  is  there  a  certain  persuasiveness  to  Aristotle's
conception of happiness? This brings us back to  the  question  whether  the
knowledge involved  in  the  Aristotelian  ethics  is  genuinely  practical.
Insofar as there is  such  a  thing  as  practical  knowledge,  we  have  to
identify it as the  knowledge  that  actually  shapes  an  agent's  actions.
Assuming, then, as Aristotle does, that  the  human  agent  in  his  or  her
deliberations is guided  by  a  certain  at  least  implicit  conception  of
happiness which constitutes his or her  'practical  knowledge,'  Aristotle's
practical knowledge would lead him to keep his slaves while mine would  lead
me to attmpt to liberte his slaves. This means that  Aristotle's  conception
of happiness is--that is, actually  functions  as--practical  knowledge  for
Aristotle, for his actions are  guided  by  it,  but  it  is  not  practical
knowledge for me, since it does not inspire my actions. Hence,  I  have  not
found Aristotle's reasoned analysis of happiness persuasive in  a  practical
way, which is the whole point of Aristotle's ethics,  for  he  wants  it  to
result in the "target" at which we ought to aim as  human  beings,  and  his
target is such that the person who kept his or her slaves would be  wise  by
that standard. Thus, no,
Aristotle's ethics is not  a  work  that  imparts  practical  knowledge.  It
simply is a work that  makes  explicit  the  conception  of  happiness  that
corresponds to the actions of those  agents  of  which  Aristotle  approves,
which is not the conception of happiness that corresponds to my actions  and
which does not inspire my actions even  after  I  have  perused  Aristotle's
reasoned analysis.
      There is, however, another angle to the issue. Indeed,  I  might  also
say that Aristotle's conception of happiness is persuasive to me, but  that,
as it is presented in the  NE,  it  does  not  involve  anything  concerning
salves and women. This may well be the case. But, then, in what way is  that
conception of happiness practical, since it cannot  inform  my  deliberation
about having or not having slaves, about enfranchising or not  enfranchising
women? How can we, in this hypothesis, consider the  NE  successful  in  its
central purpose, that is, as  a  work  of  practical  knowledge  that  would
satisfy Socrates and us in our quest for  practical  wisdom?  In  short,  if
Aristotle's conception of happiness, however persuasive or  unpersuasive  it
may be, is incapable of guiding our actions, it is not  practical  knowledge
in any way.
      Let us return to our beginning.  The  promise  of  philosophy  was  to
offer  the  rational  way  out  from  the  Babel  Tower   of   our   furious
disagreements in matters of action. It seems, however,  that  after  a  long
detour through Socrates and Plato, with Aristotle we find ourselves  exactly
where we were before philosophy appeared. For if, as Nussbaum  rightly  puts
it, for  Aristotle  "the  appropriate  criterion  of  correct  choice  is  a
thoroughly human being,  the  person  of  practical  wisdom,"  and  if  this
amounts to saying that the person of practical wisdom is what an  individual
(be it Aristotle, or myself, or President Bush, or the Pope)  determines  to
be a person of practical wisdom--or what  a  culture  (be  it  the  Athenian
culture of the fourth century before Christ,  or  the  American  culture  of
today, or the Catholic Church of the seventeenth century) determines  to  be
a person of practical wisdom, then the promise of philosophy  of  furnishing
the rational way out of the Babel Tower is a sad delusion.
WHAT IS MY POINT?
      ARIS' NE IS A HIGHLY CONFUSED AND CONFUSING WORK
1) Aris senses the difference between theoretical and  practical  knowledge,
but analyzes it wrongly.
2) Socrates and Plato wanted an algorythmic theory of the good  which,  once
understood, would automatically make people good.  For  them,  understanding
is identical with being motivated. Aris realizes that this is not  possible.
But why, precisely, is this not possible? - No Forms in this domain  -  Only
approximative, inexact knowledge possible - The knowledge  involved  in  the
practical domain does not aim at the truth but at appropriate action  -  The
knowledge involved in the practical domain is of a different  kind--desirous
knowledge - The knowledge involved in the practical  domain  is  essentially
particular, unlike the knowledge of natures.
POSTSCRIPT
      Aris' view of happiness as the human telos is highly abstract.  It  is
based on an abstract  subject  no  matter  what  the  circumstances  (not  a
multiplicity of subjects in concrete circumstances, sharing the  same  world
of scarcity, and therefore bound to conflict with  each  other's  'rational'
desires). Because it remains on a high level of generality it  may  be  look
persuasive, at least to those of us who have been influenced  by  the  Greek
ethos. In the measure, however, that  it  is  general  it  is  incapable  of
supporting sufficiently coincrete rules of thumb. From the NE, even  if  one
fully agreed with it, one would not be able to  exclude  the  subjection  of
women and slavery.
      In addition, Aris' conception of happiness,  that  is,  of  the  goods
that make people rationally happy, is not 'motivating' by itself.  Which  is
indeed strange given our natural desire to be happy  and  makes  one  wonder
whether ethics is primarily about being happy. It is not  motivating  for  a
'good' is only what functions as a good, that  is,  what  is  pursued  by  a
subject, what is either sensibly or  at  least  rationally  desired  by  the
subject with a  desire  that  informs  his  or  her  action.  Now,  somebody
habituated in a culture different from Aristotle's, that is,  in  a  culture
with different goods  and  different  virtues,  either  will  disagree  with
Aristotle's enumeration of the goods and with his list of virtues, or if  by
chance he or  she  agrees  because  of  the  the  level  of  generality  and
abstraction or Aris's analysis will  either  be  akratic  or  make  concrete
decisions of which Aris would not approve, such as  abstaining  from  having
slaves and, if possible, suppressing the institution of slavery
     [1] The Fragility of Goodness, p. 290.
     [2] Euthyphro, 16, translated by G. M. A. Grube.

[i]. In this argument I am following Aristotle himself, who neatly makes
the same distinction I am making here:
      "... the carpenter's and the geometer's inquiries about the right
      angle are different also; the caprpenter's is confined to the right
      angle's usefulness for his work, whereas the geometer's concerns what,
      or what sort of thing, the right angle is, since he studies the truth.
      We must do the same, then, in other areas too..." (EN 1098a25).

