---
title: "AUTHENTI"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/AUTHENTI"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.0
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\WP\CHANT\AUTHENTIC December 22, 93

AUTHENTICITY AND PRACTICAL KNOWLEDGE

"Nobody uses fine language when teaching

geometry" (Aristotle, Rhetoric 3.1.140a12).

"The propositions of faith... are so many

pieces of paper, not identifiable as God's

tender until we see them in  use" (Eugene

Ferdinand Rogers. See my chant\draft-9, p. 4, note).

"The principle can be established that for a man who does not cheat what he believes to be true must determine his action" (A. Camus).

"... treatment of what Aris makes into the distinction between 'internal' and 'external' success, between acting properly as a doctor and bringing about a cure. They dissociate the concept of injury ('external' failure) from that of malpractice ('internal' failure), and they point out that such a distinction makes snense only because medicine is not the application of a

known body of knowledge, an applied science, but instead what Aristotle means by an art or faculty . Aristotle repeatedly relies on analogies between rhetoric and medicine, and the two standards of success are one of the features that makes the analogy apt (Eugene Garver, "Aristotle's Rhetoric as a work of philosophy, Philosophy and Rhetoric , vol. 19. no. 1, 1986, p. 21, note 4).

There is a connection between the principle of authenticity as defined by Camus and the practical or applicative character of knowledge . This is what I want to explore here.

Authenticity is here understood as the coherence between a person's convictions and his or her actions. He who is genuinely convinced of something acts accordingly. If one does not act according to one's convictions, then one is cheating others, and perhaps even oneself, as to his or her convictions. For the fact is that one always acts acording to one's convictions, though not always according to one's professed convictions.

For the coherence between convictions and actions to be possible there must exist not only a certain connection between convictions and actions, so that convictions by their very nature lead to (or inform?) actions (or are conviction-informed actions), but there must also be a determinate connection, so that this conviction, given the appropriate circumstances, is compatible with these but not with those actions.

(a) Convictions by their very nature lead to (or inform?) actions

or are conviction-informed actions

"By their very nature": that is, if something is a conviction it necessarily, under the appropriate circumstances, results in action; and if it does not, it is not a genuine conviction, however much it might otherwise look or feel or be professed as a conviction, for it does not function as genuine convictions do.

However, not everything that leads to action is a conviction. Light produces contraction  of the pupil, but light is not a conviction. Correspondingly, the contraction of the pupil is not an "action," for the actions of which we are speaking here follow convictions and nothing else but convictions, so that if light is not a conviction the contraction of the pupil produced by the presence of light cannot be an action.

Why is light not a conviction and why is the contraction of the pupil not  an action? Though the reflex "contraction of the pupil" is not an action, an action nonetheless is, like the reflex, a response to something--light, in this case. It is the presence of light, not of water or anything else, that elicits the contraction of the pupil, so that there is a particular relation of the contraction of the pupil to the presence of light. When such relationship of a particular behavior of a living organism  to a feature of the environment obtains we speak of a response rather than of an effect. But if an action is a behavior of a living organism in response to something, why is not a reflex an action? Because an action is informed by a conviction, whereas a response is not .

The very word we use in connection with reflexes is enlightening. We say that the presence of light produces the contraction of the pupil. By this we mean that the contraction of the pupil is simply an effect of the presence of light, that is, that it follows the presence of light as an automatic response to it. In the case of action, however, the response is not automatic  because it is mediated by a conviction. Another way of putting the same is to say that a reflex is a phenomenon that belongs exclusively in the physical or the physiological order, whereas a response as such belongs in the intentional order, that is, in the order of meaningful reference of the responding subject to the grasped identity of the object for response.

Let us explain. If exposed to light my pupil contracts. Now, this happens as much if I am in a coma as if I am perfectly awake because the response is merely caused by the presence of light and does not involve or demand any conscious activity on my part. Contrast this response with the response of running away in the presence of a snake and you will begin to grasp the difference between the intentional and the merely causal order. I run away in the presence of a snake only if I see the snake; for if the snake is very close to me but I do not see it I do not run away. The intentional order, we just said, is the order of meaningful reference to the object's identity. In other words, it is the order of a subject's awareness of the surrounding world, in which the subject is not only surrounded by the world but is aware of the surroundig world and responds to it accordingly. In this case, then, I run away because I amn aware of the snake. In other words, my being aware of the snake inform s  (and mediates?) my action.

"Informs." What does this mean? Informing means, etymologically, giving definite form or shape to something. What has no form, no shape, has no identity. In philosophical jargon, informing means giving intelligible identity to a phenomenon. My behavior of running away is given its intelligible identity by the snake of which I am aware in that it is a response to the snake of which I am aware. If you ask me why I ran, I will answer "Because I saw a snake near me," and this will render intelligible or explain my conduct to you, for my conduct was indeed in response to the snake I saw.

But let us be careful here. The intelligibility of what we are talking  is the intelligibility of the observed behavior of running. What you are asking me is the reason, that is, the intelligible form of the behavior you observed. My seeing the snake makes intelligible to you the behavior you observed and for which you want an explanation. But I , the agent, did not observe that behavior; I behaved, that is, responded to the snake I saw . So my seeing the snake explains to the observer my observed behavior as giving the reason for my behavior. But did I who behaved in that way have a reason, and that particular reason, for running away at the time I so behaved? Let us see.

Most certainly, at the time I behaved I was not explanining my behavior; I just ran away from the snake. Under the circumstances, I grasped the snake as fugiendus in the name of a desired future state of affairs. So the snake as fugiendus (experienced by me) informed my action, not in the sense of making it intelligible but of making it be a practical response to snake. The snake as fugiendus, in other words, informed my action in the sense of motivating it, not in the sense of explaining it . As an observed phenomenon, my conduct may need explanation. But my conduct LIKE MY BODY is a phenomenon for the Other , not for me. As a real conduct, my conduct is motivated. It seems, however, that the motivation that informs the conduct as real is the same that informs the conduct as intelligible phenomenon. In other words, it seems that what is motive for the agent is explanatory reason for the witness . Is this true?

The witness takes my "Because I saw a snake in my path" as an intelligible explanation that satisfies his or her desire to understand--his-her curiosity, not his-her concern. This shows that the witness grasps motivated conduct, that is, action informed by motive, not just caused movement. But the witness grasps it as reason-motive (rather than reason-cause) that explains the action, not as motive for acting. As we just saw, however, the motive informs the agent as motive, not as reason. The witness judges with assent, the agent acts motivatedly . Now, if motive and reason function differently, can they be the same? In other words, can the understood reason for an action be legitimately identified with the motivated action?

It seems to me that the agent does not have motives in the sense of 'grasping' them , thetically or non-thetically. What we generally understand by   "motives" are explanatory reasons (not motivating realities) that result from objectification of action as explanandum and appear to reflection as reasons (or feelings) the agent experienced and that render intelligible the action and satisfy the sheer desire to understand a phenomenon . But that does not represent the agent's experience . A reason is to be understood and assented to; the agent does not understand any reason; the agent is inclined to act by the object of exposure . The snake to which I am exposed is fugiendus both objectively and attitudinally. Grasping the snake under these circumstances of exposure is the same as fleeing it. If this is correct, though, it applies to the domain of "convictions." For I seem to be saying that actions are not distinguishable from convictions, that actions are convictional or are not actions.

Let us use a concrete example. I abstain from going to bed with this girl for fear of aids because I have chosen as my goal (or nature has imposed on me the goal of) avoiding aids . For this I have to perceive her as likely carrier of aids and be afraid of aids. Perceiving her as likely carrier of aids, given my goal, is responding to her as such, and viceversa. What would correspond here to a "conviction"?  Something like "Aids is vitandum." This amounts to "I am afraid of aids ( either automatically, or for good reason ) and, therefore, I will avoid it." My perceiving this girl as likely carrier of aids together with my goal to avoid aids informs my conduct in response to the girl.

WHAT IS A CONVICTION?

What, then, is meant by a "conviction"? A conviction seems to be something that FUNCTIONS AS a goal not passively received but chosen for good reason, that is, for a reason one finds persusasive because connected with the identity of the object to which one is exposed and of the subject one has chosen to be. Let us explore this definition.

A goal passively received is such that, in circumstances of exposure to the object in which response is called for, the action that aims at realizing the goal autmatically obtains unless forcibly prevented. This is connected with the pereceived identity of the object. One can learn from past experience more efficient means of obtaining the goal, but one cannot help pursuing the goal dictated by exposure to the object . The action is of the intentional order in that it is mediated by awareness of exposure to object, but the exposure to object does not function as inclination to the action  but as cause of the action. Animals cannot go further than this, as we will see that Aris realized. People, however, can do better.

[ RETURN TO THIS TO DISTINGUISH SPECULATIVE FROM PRACTICAL: In other words, in the best case animals have A SORT OF response quia (no9t wuite, because they are not linguistic ; that is, they respond 'intentionally,' but they never respond propter quid, that is, they do not transform the environment in ways they invent. One of the ways in which people do differently from--and better than--animals, according to Aris, is that they do not only respond quia, as animals do, but know quia and know propter quid. But Aris understands response propter quid as based on a purely spekculative piece of knowledge].

In people the exposure to object can function as mere inclination to action rather than as cause of action. I may desire the girl whom I perceive as a likely carrier of aids, yet abstain from going to bed with her. I deliberate. I weigh pros and cons and finally choose my goal--a state of affairs in which I am distanced from the girl--, the identity I will confer on the girl--fugienda rather than amplexenda--, and the means. The inclination, in other words, becomes conviction, or at least roots of conviction that will give shape to a character .

Convictions, however, are rational in a way in which desires and desires-causes are not. Only that which is good (under the concrete circumstances) should be desired and pursued, only that which is bad (under the concrete circumstances) should be feared and averted, only that which is achievable should be chosen as a goal, only that which is conducive to the goal should be employed as means), and that does not depend, or at least not exclusively, on the subject who desires. In other words, as suggested by Freud, there is a dialectic between desires and reality (between activity and passivity?) which makes it imperative for human agents to function according to the principle of reality.

Aristotle seems to agree with Freud , for he remarks that not everything is object of deliberation. One deliberates only about what can practically (not merely conceivably) be otherwise than it presently is, that is, about what can presently be changed (controlled?) by the agent. [And--somekthing Aris does not make quite explicit--one deliberates as an agent and for purposes of action, not as a contemplator and for purposes of satisfying curiosity]. This has to do with the principle of reality, with the coefficient of instrumentality of the world in relation to the agent at a given time and depending on the urgency of the response. I add, in support of Freud, that one deliberates only about states of affairs that can be better, that is, more conform than the present state of affairs to what one desires. Thus, because of the principle of reality, if there are no means available, one can choose as one's goal to create the conditions of possibility  for that goal, but one cannot immediately choose that goal as the term of one's action. So that cannot function as the goal of the action, at least not for the time being, for purposes of the action to be presently engaged in. Only when the means become available will that goal effectively become a goal. A goal is a goal only when it appears achievable and is chosen, and the means are means only when they appear available as means and are implemented.

This dialectic between desire and realization-reality is what makes pertinent the issue of knowledge involved in Aris's commentary on knowledge quia and knowledge propter quid, so closely related to objectification and so closely connected with the Aristotelian confusion between speculative and practical knowledge . The dialectic makes knowedge pertinent. Indeed, if desire  were not to be realized, if it were not aversion to a present state of the world to which the agent is exposed and desire of a better state of the world in relation to the agent, if the agent were not needful and causally exposed to the world, then knowledge (of reality, of the world) would be irrelevant. If, on the other hand, agents were no source of intentional causality according to desires that polarize and structure the intelligible 'reality' (of the world) in definite ways that exclude certain conditions as alienating, then knowledge as pure intelligibility would be possible and in order and then desire-action would be irrelevant . The tension, therefore, and the dialectic between the two terms are to be preserved. But the Aristotelian confusion between speculative and practical knowledge as two species of the same genus and the reduction of the latter to the former are to be done away with.

But does Aris really confuse the two?

ARIS' CONFUSION OF ACTION WITH SPECULATIVE KNOWLEDGE

Let us first collect the pertinent data.

According to Aris-Aquinas ( Metaphysicorum A ), lower animals are naturally programmed to respond, whereas higher animals "aliquid experimenti, licet parum, participare videntur," "quia ex multis sensibus et memoria animalia ad aliquid consuescunt prosequendum vel vitandum. "Experimentum... est ex collatione plurium singularium in memoria receptorum. Huiusmodi autem collatio est homini propria, et pertinet ad vim cogitativam, quae ratio particularis dicitur: quae est collativa intentionum individualium, sicut ratio universalis intentionum universalium" (16) ( Vide \wp\chant\draft-9 ). Thus, at least in higher mammals we find a beginning of motivation rather than mere causation: "experimentum" shapes the perception of object insofar as it is prosequendum vel vitandum, that is, the perception of motivating-object. Higher animals learn from experience, that is, develop practical expectations which are not innate, so that when actually exposed to the object they are caused-motivated to respond.  Animals, however, partake only "parum" in "experimentum" because they cannot grasp and formulate (OBJECTIFY?) as a reason what they perceive as "prosequendum vel vitandum," whereas people do: "Don't go to bed with whatever girl because many of them are likely carriers of aids." This is not only "response quia"  but "knowledge quia," which can be communicated verbally but is accepted only on the authority of the (experienced) commmunicator; for, as we shall see, what makes the difference is communication through demonstration, which presupposes knowledge propter quod on the communicator's part.

People, at least in that they possess full "experimentum," are superior to animals. But they are not superior only in this regard. "Homines autem supra experimentum, quod pertinet ad rationem particularem, habent rationem universalem, per quam vivunt, sicut per id quod est principale in eis . Sicut autem se habet experimentum ad rationem particularem, et consuetudo ad memoriam in animalibus, ita se habet ars ad rationem universalem" (16).

"Dicitur ergo primo quod ex memoria in hominibus experimentum causatur. Modus autem causandi est iste: quia ex multis memoriis unius rei accipit homo experimentum de aliquo, quo experimento potens est ad facile et recte operandum. Et ideo quia potentiam recte et faciliter operandi praebet experimentum , videtur fere simili esse scientiae et arti . Est enim similitudo eo quod utrobique ex multis una acceptio alicuius sumitur. Dissimilitudo autem, quia per artem accipiuntur universalia, per experimentum singularia" (17). "Ex experientia in hominibus fit sicentia et ars... experimentum fit ex memoria. Nam sicut ex multis memoriis fit una experimentalis scientia, ita ex multis experimentis apprehensis fit universalis acceptio de omnibus similibus. Unde plus habet hoc ars quam experimentum: quia experimentum tantum circa singularia versatur" (18). "... quantum ad actum pertinet, experientia nihil videtur diferre ab arte... quia sicut experimentum circa singularia operatur, ita et ars; unde praedicta differentia erat in cognoscendo tantum " (20-21). " Illi qui sciunt causam et propter quid scientiores sunt et sapientiores illis qui ignorant causam, sed solum sciunt quia. Experti autem sciunt quia sed nesciunt propter quid. Artifices vero sciunt causam, et propter quid " (24). "... SIGNUM SCIENTIS EST, QUOD POSSIT DOCERE, QUOD EST SCIENTIAM IN ALIO CAUSARE. [ Is this not the confusion between practical-applicative knowledge and theoretical knowledge? In animals the "quia" of experimentum is not formulated, only practiced . In people there is formulated "quia," but it is meant and heard practically (a least dispositionally and as expectation), like "Your mother is on the phone ." When this knowledge "quia" is taken as a re-presentation of reality and the "propter quod" of that contemplatively known is looked for and found, the confusion has occurred. Indeed, the interesting "propter quod" (for instance, the understanding of why or how aids acts is itself practical, applicative, not like the demonstration of a geometric theorem that compels assent but not action. THIS IS MERE THEORETICAL DOCERE, like the theoretical docere of a dogma or of God's existence.] Artifices autem docere possunt, quia cum causas cognoscant, ex eis possunt demonstrare: demonstratio autem est syllogismus faciens scire, ut dicitur primo Posteriorum . Experti autem non possunt docere, quia non possunt ad scientiam perducere, cum causam ignorent. Et si ea quae experimento cognoscunt aliis tradant, non recipient per modum scientiae, sed per modum opinionis vel credultitatis. Unde patet quod artifices sint magis spaienties et scientes expertis" (29). Nonetheless, when it is a matter of acting, experti are more efficient than sapientiores without experience: "Sed quamvis in modo operandi ars et experimentum non differant, quia utraque circa singularia operatur, differunt tamen in efficacia operandi. Nam experti magis proficiunt in operando illis qui habent rationem universalem artis sine experimento" (20-21) (THINK OF GEOMETRY AND APPLIED GEOMETRY).

Aris, therefore, sees a certain commonality, or at least continuity, between animals and people. The commonality concerns what Nussbaum following Aris calls "motion" (as distinguished from mere "change"). Both the higher species of animals as well as people perceive, that is, 'intend' objects in the world by which they are surrounded. This is what they have in common. If we call knowledge this 'intending objects', then what at least superior animals and people have in common is knowledge. Yet knowledge functions differently in animals and in people. In animals the intending of objects is purely practical, that is, directed to the satisfaction of their inherited needs and strictly subordinated to it. In other words, animals know or intend only those objects which they are biolgogically programmed to desire or fear (because those objects satisfy or threaten the satisfaction of their survival needs) or, in the case of the higher species of animals, which past experience ('experimentum') teaches them to desire or fear; furhtermore, they intend those objects only practically (by being disposed to pursue or avoid them or by actually pursuing or avoiding them). This is what above I called "response-quia".  "Response" because it is either actual behavior related to those objects, or emotive disposition to behave. "Quia" because the response is geared toward the object under the specific chaacteristic by which it satisfies or threatens the satisfaction of needs. Thus a dog only 'knows' meat by appetizing it as meat, not in any other capacity. If a dog confuses something with meat, it will appetize it, respond to it as meat, which shows the "quia" of the response. By contrast, people do not only respond-quia but know -quia and know -propter quid. What is the importance of this difference?

In the case of animals knowledge and response are identical and inseparable; knowledge is a particular kind of motion, discriminating  or "quia" response. People, by contrast, can abstract or separate mentally or distinguish the "quia" from the response in which it was originally incarnated . THIS IS THE PRECISE POINT AT WHICH CONFUSION BECOMES POSSIBLE because the "quia" can become substantified or 'objectified' and its intrinsic connection to action may be lost sight of.

People can abstract or separate mentally. [Whether the separation is mental or otherwise remains to be seen]. What does this mean? There are two ways of separating: one , in situation of exposure, which keeps the direct connection with response (through the direct relationship to the encountering subject and the consequent affective component) and only delays the response; the other , in situation of observation, which forgets the direct connection with response and considers the object by itself without (direct or immediate) relationship to the subject. Let us consider concrete examples.

One . In animals, natural or programmed aversion or desire plus presence of object under objective and subjective conditions of action automatically produce action according to the natural or acquired program. If exposed to two objects of desire or aversion, action automatically obtains according to the stronger desire or aversion, without deliberation and personal decision on the animals part. In other words, animals are passive as to their goals . (The difference between lower and higher animals regards their capacity to learn new means of mximizing success in their goals--thanks to "phantasia"?). Not so--or at least not necessarily so--in adult, fully developped people. This is to say that, in situation of exposure, the connection between presence of object and response can be cut by the subject because the subject can choose his or her goals and even invent new goals .

For instance, a hungry dog will necessarily try to eat the meat in whose presence it is; not so a hungry person. Yet, the person desires food; but the "quia" of food works only affectively, not effectively, and the "quia" that works effectively (though not necessariy affectively) is determined by the choice of the agent .

For instance, a hungry person gives her bread to somebody. She chooses her goal--a satisfactory state of affairs for the other.

Now we can understand the "separation betwween the quia and the response, in situations of exposure," which is possible to adult people and impossible to animals. In the case of animals, I said above, knowledge and response are identical, or at least inseparable . That is, the quia determines simultaneously the identity of the object (food) and the reality of the response, and the quia is given to the animal. In the case of adult people, though, the quia originally given works affectively but not effectively, and by choosing his or her goal the agent determines the effective identity of the object and the reality of the response . This determination, of course, is not--or at least ought not to be--arbitrary (think of the response to cows as sacred animals).

This last point leads us to knowledge as practical judgment .

Judgment because it is informed by information and reflection (however much these may be subservient to the prevailing paradigm), not automatic response. Practical because it is judgment in the order of exposure and desire and it is intrinsically ordered to action.

At any rate, because  what was quia in one case is not quia in another case, the distinction between the action as movement and the quia becomes possible (with the result that the object as motivating and the object as object for contemplation also becomes possible). Once this distinction  arises the quia becomes a purely factual, objective feature of the object, unrelated to response by an exposed agent. Hence knowledge becomes separated and independent from action (though action may remain dependent upon knowledge). THIS IS THE ILLUSION OF THE PRIMACY OF KNOWLEDGE OVER ACTION .

The contemplated quia as an objective feature is expressed in a statement. The superior possibilities of people arise, in  part, from their ability to combine their experience as exposed subjects and as observers with the experience of other people, through the linguistic culture by which they are shaped and which they contribute to shape in different capacities and areas or fields. This needs to be developped, but for the moment I want to deal with knowledge propter quid because of its importance for understanding the Aristotelian confusion between theoretical and practical knowledge and his reduction of the latter to the former.

As we just saw, knowledge- quia (objective feature) arises out of response quia (because it is abstracted from it and works originally in situations of encounter). "Somebody is in the house" is the quia for calling the police. But sometimes the situation is less definite and urgent and the agent has time to deliberate about means, or has previously programmed herself (accustomed herself) to a non-spontaneous response, or finds herself torn between different objects of desire and has to deliberate and decide, that is, to determine the identity of the object and the reality of her response, given the means available. In all these cases, though, we are in situation of (perhaps delayed) exposure, affectively structured, directly related to conduct, and from the standpoint of the exposed agent . This quia is applicative, informative of action, motivating of action because it is experienced by a an exposed subject, and it is explanatory of action for a witness because it refers a subject who has experience of exposure to the dramatic structure of her own experience of objects. The quia, however, refers to the identity of the object, and when one is not exposed but just observing it is easy to ignore or forget that it is  the identity of the object in relation to an exposed subject . In that case, the observer, of course, will find the (reported) agent's desire or fear a mere blind feeling, for the object as observed (that is, not experienced in relation to an exposed subject) does not reveal its dangerousness or usefulness. Thus, by itself, "somebody in the house" is a mere fact (of the kind imagined by those who believe that language (rather than people concretely situated) means, and of the kind favored by Aquinas in his commentary on Peri Hermeneias, for it neither disposes affectively to action nor informs action ) , for it is objectively (that is, experientially and intelligibly) dangerous only in relation to a certain kind of subject in a certain kind of situation.

Notice, however, that "somebody is in the house," for an observer, is abstract, but it still is a fragment of a possible storical or existential inhabitable (phantasia?) world. In other words, it is not yet 'objectified,' not transformed into object of consideration  for curious inquiry for purposes of formal explanation, that is, of grasping its intelligibility in itself as a phenomenon . Only when objectification has taken place can knowledge quia become transformed into knowledge propter quid and the confusion between theoretical and practical knowledge arise.

What exactly is objectification? It involves abstraction, but a special kind of abstraction since the abstraction is for purposes of explanation and has to be adapted to its purpose. The explanandum is phenomenalized, that is, transformed into object of consideration taken by itself, in isolation from everything else, without reference to a concrete context. Furthermore, the explanation looked for is not quia, but the propter quid of a quia. And the quias that interest this curious contemplator are not singular but the quias of uniform, repeated events which can be subsumed under one explanation because their intelligibility is the same . Thus, to be concrete, the explanation looked for is not of this or that eclipse but of all eclipses, of the phenomenon eclipse; not of this or that fall on inclined planes, but of all falls on inclined planes. Hence the actual explanation will take the shape of a universal structure that renders the phenomenon intelligible. Therefore the objectification or phenomenalization through abstraction will abstract from here and now (concrete time and space) . "Somebody is in the house" refers to a singular person at a concrete moment and in a concrete particular place in space. Thus, though abstract (because isolated from its context), "Somebody is in the house" does not possess the kind of abstraction needed for knowledge propter quid. For Aris, though, knowledge of essences or natures, knowledge propter quid, knowledge of the (at least relatively) unchangeable and universal MAY NOT BE PRACTICAL, that is, may not be applicative but merely contemplative. In any case, for the medievals there seems to be real confusion.  

THE CONFUSION

Important points concerning objectification .

Objectification involves abstraction, consideration of something by itself as object. But that which is abstracted and becomes object may be of two kinds: either it speaks to the imagination even though one is not exposed to it or even considers it as something to which someone is exposed, or it appeals to pure intelligence .

As an example of the latter, think of the geometrical triangle. It is not object of exposure or even of thought of exposure. In a way, it is imaginable. But it is not treated as such, it is not triangle in an inhabitable world furrowed by paths: only one imaginable quality, the geometrical shape, is taken into consideration to the exclusion of all others (size, color, weight...). In addition, the object is abstracted from time and pace.  All that remains is the object referred to by the definition -- a universal object, A CONCEPT . This is the explanandum, what is to be made intelligible, and the explanation takes the form of a predicative judgment .

As a second example, think of aids (in research, not in medicine). Aids is not a concrete object. It is a name that refers to the object defined, constituted by a set of descriptive characteristics of the physiological effects of aids. This is the explanandum by something equally abstract.

By contrast, when I ask you why are you running, I am abstracting your running, but not at all in the same way. Your running is the imaginable one, not just one aspect of it, and at such a time and in such a place. It is not the universal running referred to by a descriptive definition, but a singular one--yours, at such a time, in such a place.

In both cases we may speak of knowledge-quia. I know why you ran, that is, I understand your having run. I know what produces aids, how aids is produced. But in the first case it is the quia-motive or even the quia-cause of a singular, whereas in the second it is the intelligibility of an abstract universal, of a CONCEPT, which explains all the cases of aids. "Objectification" properly so called refres only to the second case . OBJECTIFICATION, THEREFORE, AMOUNTS TO CONCEPTUALIZATION ACCORDING TO AN ABSTRACT 'DESCRIPTIVE' DEFINITION THAT CONTAINS ONLY THE RELEVANT TRAITS AS ESSENTIAL OR ESSENCE-CONNECTED. And if the explanation is successful it yields 'knowledge-propter quid' properly so called.

When Aris speaks of knowledge quia he refers not to the knowledge of a singular but of a number of singulars of the same kind , which through memory are reduced to one and the same descriptive definition, such as eclipse, fall, aids. "Cold (assume) is cured by heat." Why do you apply heat? Because I have observed that cold are cured by heat. Response quia, abstract reason quia. The reason propter quid would explain , that is, render intelligible, make known, why heat cures.

Aris suggests--or explicitly affirms?--that knowledge propter quid is scientific knowledge because it is strictly universal and necessarily true AND IS KNOWLEDGE OF CAUSE. (CHECK WHICH ARE THE THREE THEORETICAL DISCIPLINES ACCORDING TO ARIS : THEY ARE: Physics, mathematics, and metaphysics. See Met. E, 1, 1026a 18-19). One exceptionless explanation. If this is correct, no knowledge (even explanatory knowledge) of concrete singular (such as your running) can be considered scientific ( but see Suzanne Mansion on Aristotle's mistakes and inconsistencies ). On the other hand, Aris seems to suggest that practical knowledge (at least the involved agent's knowledge) is always of singular and contingent, so that it cannot be scientific. From this it would follow that practical knowledge cannot be scientific; in other words, it would follow that theoretical knowledge (mathematics, physics, metaphysics) is coextensive with scientific knowledge, and that practical knowledge is if not coextensive with non-scientific knowledge (because non-practical 'opinions' about singular facts) at least belongs under non-scientific knowledge.

HOWEVER, ARISTOTLE'S VIEWS--IF THESE ARE INDEED HIS VIEWS-- ARE NOT EVIDENT. Geometrical and physical knowledge (Galileo on fall) seem to be applicative, even more securely applicative than, say, ethical or other practical knowledge. YET there seems to be a possibility of distinguishing the theoretical-assentful moment from the applicative-active one, and Aris may have been misled by this . Indeed, in geometry, the demonstration of a theorem is independent from the applicative practice, and may perhaps be pursued without any desire or even conception of possible application. [ THIS WOULD NOT EXCLUDE THAT OUR 'NATURAL DESIRE TO KNOW' ARISES PRIMARILY FROM OUR BEING EXPOSED ]. In physics, the experimental demonstration of the formula of the fall of bodies on inclined planes is independent, too, and may be pursued without any desire or even conception of a possible application. Even in everyday singular facts, the assent to the fact (understanding with assent) seems to be independent from application. For instance, assent to a fact such as "There was a man downstairs."

What to make of all this?

There seems to be an equivocation involved in Aris' notion of practical knowledge. On the one hand, it is knowledge had by exposed agent of object of aversion or desire, that actually functions as knowledge when incarnated in appropriate response. It is knowledge that moves , not knowledge that satisfies curiosity and terminates in mere understanding with assent. On the other hand, because it is called "knowledge," practical knowledge seems to fall under the same genus as speculative . And, indeed, it seems that some knowledge (metaphysics, for instance) is only speculative, but some speculative knowledge can remain purely speculative (true, object of assent, satisfactor of curiosity), or be applied.  

We know that the knowledge of the Ethics by its very nature cannot be scientific, that is, strictly universal . We know that the knowledge of the Ethics is practical, that is, aimed at (and resulting in) practice . The question I am asking is whether the knowledge of the Ethics cannot be scientific because it is practical (which amounts to saying that all scientific knowledge is theoretical), or because it is inexact by nature (not exceptionless, only for the most part) (which amounts to saying that no practical knowledge can be scientific).

It seems that one can agree with Aris' Ethics theoretically without living accordingly . That is the case of the acratic. BUT Aris would deny that that is real (practical) knowledge , because practical knowledge results in action informed by knowledge or it is not practical . In the wise person, practical knowledge is identical with correct action. And, insofar as practical knowledge is abstract , it arises from action and is practical disposition to act.

The practical knowledge of the Ethics cannot be exact, secure, strictly universal , because practical application involves deliberation, which is incompatible with what is sure.

It seems that every knowledge of a strictly universal character as defined above, that is, strictly sientific knowledge, is theoretical, according to Aris. Indeed, in the Ethics he denies its strictly sicientific character. Why? Because no strict universal, exceptionless knowledge. But also because it is practical knowledge, where deliberation and decision have a place, which would be impossible about things that are sure.

All sicentific knowledge is strictly universal (is knowledge of essence). Since practical knowledge is not strictly universal, it cannot be scientific.

Practical knowledge in Gauthier

- p. 852: Les trois sciences contemplatives: la physique, la mathematique et la metaphysique (Met. E, 1m 1026a 18-19 .

- pp. 862-3: La vie contemplative est pour Aris un element de a vie ideale, elle n'est pas a elle seule totue la vie ideale. La vie ideale est une vie mixte: vie de jouissance, vie politique, vie contemplative. Il est plus difficile de preciser la nature du lien qui unit la vie active a la vie contemplative a cause de l'equivoque que renferme sa conception meme de la vie pratique et l'insuffisance de son anthropologie . Pour Aris la vie pratique est la vie de pratique des vertus morales, c. a.d. une vie vertueuse, mais les vertus trouvent leur chamnp d'action privilegie dans la vie politique, dnas l' exercise des magistratures civiles ou des commandements militaires. Cela a amene Dicearque a revindiquer la primaute pour la vie pratique : le philosophe qui parle de politique comme Aris l'a fait, n'est vraiment un philosophe que s'il ne se contente pas de discourir, mais agit, le but etant non la connaissance mais l'action . C'est la meme ambiguite qui se retrouve chez Platon: le philosophe-roi . L'incertitude subsiste dans le cas d'Aris sur le rapport de l'activite vertueuse et du bonheur : l'activite des vertus morales est-elle une partie secondaire, mais une partie, du tout qu'est le bonheur, la partie principale en etant la contemplation, ou n'est -elle qu'un  moyen de parvenir a cette fin qui reside dans la contemplation? - Quant a l'anthropologie d'Aris , tant qu'Aris identifie l'homme avec l'intellect (comme il semble le faire jusqu'au moment ou il ecrit De Anima avec son hylemorphisme) , la perfection de 'homme c'est la perfection de l'intellect, et de meme que la partie desirante n'est humaine que dans la mesure ou elle participe a la vie de l'intellect en  lui obeissant et en travaillant pour lui, de meme l'activite des vertus morales ne se rattache a la perfection de l'homme que dans la mesure ou la sagesse la penetre d'intellectualite et la fait courir a l'epanouissement de la contemplation. Seule la psychologie du traite De l'ame, en montrant que l'homme, c'est le compose, a permis a Aris de faire de l'activite des vertus morales une activite qui est DE PLEIN DROIT une activite de l'homme et une partie de sa perfection et de son bonheur .

- pp. 874-5: Intellect speculatif et intellect pratique:

Quelle est la partie qui par nature commande et dirige? Sans doute dans le ch. 2 du livre A de la Metaph, Aristote attribue-t-il le role directeur a la phiilosophie (982a 16-19, b 4-7), mais c'est dans un sens qu'il reconnaitra vite qu'il est impropre: en fait, la philo et l'intellect speculatif dont il est la vertu ne commandent' que'en ce sens qu'ils sont la fin en vue de laquelle commandent la sagesse et l'intellect pratique (EE, VIII, 3, 1249b 11-15; EN, VI, 13, 1145a 6-11). Le pouvoir de commander au sens propre est caracteristique de la sagesse et de l'intellect pratique ( cf plus haut, comm. sur VI, 11, 1143a 8-10 ), si bien qu'Aris a pu appeler l'intellect pratique la partie dirigeante (IIIm 5, 1113a 6). Or, ici , Aris accorde a une seule et meme partie de l'ame a la fois le pouvoir de commander, qui plus tard caracterisera l'intellect pratique , et le pouvoir de penser les belles et divines realites, qui caracterisera l'intellect speculatif . Non seulement la distinction entre intellect speculatif et intellect pratique n'apparait pas, mais n'apparait meme pas la distinction entre partie opinative et partie scientifique, dont nous avons montre qu'elle est la premiere ebauche eudemienne de cette distinction entre intellect speculatif et intellect pratique (cf comm. sur VI, 2, 1139a 3-15 ). Il n'y a encore pour Aris, comme dans le Protreptique, qu'une seule "partie rationnelle" ou qu'un seul "intellect," qui  inclut dans son unite les deux pouvoirs qui plus tard distingueront les deux parties ou les deux fonction de l'intellect . Toutefois Aris a des maintenant franchi un pas qu"il n'avait pas encore franchi dans le Protreptique: la en effet il ne reconnaissait a la partie rationnelle qu'une vertu, la sagesse (phronesis), qui, si elle etait essentiellement conemplative, n'en dirigeait pas moins l'action; ici, a la partie rationnelle qui reste encore une, il attribue deja deux vertus, la sagesse et la philosophie; mais au lieu d'etre, comme elles le seront plus tard, les vertus des deux parties de l'intellect, elles sont, l'une, la sagesse qui commande et dirige la partie desirante, la vertu de lintellect en tant qu'uni au corps ; l'autre, la philo qui contemple leks belles et divines realites, la vertu de l'intellect en tant que tel , c.a.d. en tant qu'il exerce son activite a part du corps (1178a 22): c'est donc la philo qui seule est la vertu "propre" de l'intellect (1177a 17). [N.B. La divinite de la partie rationnelle est une idee chere a l'Aris de la periode platonicienne. Elle formait la conclusion de son traite de la priere: "Dieu, c'est soit l'intellect, soit quelque chose qui est au-dela de l'intellect lui-=meme."]. DANS LES DEUX PAGES SUIVANTES (876-8), CITATION D'UN LONG TEXTE DU PROTREPTIQUE SUR LES DEUX ELEMENTS--L'AME ET LE CORPS--, SUR L'AME QUI COMMANDE, ET SUR LA VERITE QUI EST L'ACTIVITE PROPRE DE LA PARTIE PRINCIPALE DE L'AME. "CAR LA PARTIE COGNITIVE AUSSI BIEN PRISE A PART DES AUTRES QUE PRISE UNI A ELLES, EST MEILLEURE QUE TOUT LE RESTE DE L'AME; OR C'EST DE CETTE PARTIE QUE LA SCIENCE EST LA VERTU."

P. 879: "Et de tous les objets de connaissance,  les plus hauts sont ceux que considere l'intellect." Evidemment plus hauts que ceux que considerent les sens. Mais Aris etudie ici l'activite de l'intelligence suivant sa vertu propre, c.a.d. suivant la philosophie, activite contemplative. Il ne nous parle pas par consequent des objets dont a a connaitre l'intellect uni au corps (qu'il appellera plus tard l'intellect pratique ), mais uniquement des objets que conait l'intellect en tant que tel (qu'il appellera plus tard l'intellect speculatif ); or, ces objets, ce sont les belles et divines realites .

- p. 884: 11178b 7 pros to andropeueszai - pour vivre en homme : Le contemplatif, par sa contemplation, s'essaie a "vivre en immortel," a fire le dieu; il lui faut cependant bien aussi " faire l'homme," anthropweueszai (le mot est un hapax et pourrait bien etre forge par Aris), et consentir a s'humaniser (c'est la traduction que propose Coray). Aris pas plus que Platon n'a voulu faire du philosophe un solitaire, ni meme un emigre a l'interieur de la cite; il veut qu'il reste un citoyen et prenne sa part de la vie publique.

- P. 895: La doctrine du compose hylemorphique dans le De Anima :

Ni l'ame ni le corps ne sont des substances, c.a.d. n'existent l'une a part l'autre; ils ne sont que des elements, l'un forme, l'autre matiere, qui par leur union substantielle constituent la substance qui seule existe: l'homme. Et c'est parce que l'ame, simple forme, est trop liee au corps, qu'Aris, pour sauvegarder l'immaterialite de la connaissance intellectuelle, est amene a reconnaitre au dessus de l'ame et separe d'elle, et donc de l'homme, l'Intellect Actif, pensee impersonnelle qui actue l'intellect en puissance, seul part de l'ame. Il est trop clair que, dans cette psychologie, l'homme, c'est le compose, et non l'Intellect Actif. Or ici Aris, en contradiction avec cette psychologie, affirme que l'homme, c'est l'intellect, et non le compose. C'est evidemment qu'il ne parle pas du meme intellect ni du meme compose. L'intellect dont il parle ici, ce n'est pas l'Intellect Actif, c'est la partie rationnelle de notre ame, encore concu comme une substance; et le compose, ce n'est pas le compose hylemorphique, c'est le compose platonicien, ou plus exactement xenocrateen, union accidentelle de l'intellect substance et du corps substance. Seule cette psychologie platonicienne permet a Aris d'affirmer, comme l'avait fait Platon, que l'homme, c'est l'ame, et plus precisement la partie rationnelle de l'ame, et que le corps est pour elle comme un etranger (cf. 1178a 2-4). Nous sommes encore dans les perspectives de cette psyychologie platonicienne qu'Aris, dans la partie la plus ancienne de la Politique, exprime par une forte image: l'homme est l'union d'un dieu et d'une bete (Pol. III, 11, 1287a 28-32); mais ce qui est vraiment l'homme, c'est le dieu qui est en lui, non la bete . De lors tout dans notre chapitre est coherent. L'intellect, parce que'il est une substance, a une activite a lui et une vertu qui lui est propre (cf. 1176 b 17) , ce qui est en contradiction formelle avec l'enseignement du traite De l'ame, pour qui il ne saurait y avoir d'operation propre de l'ame (I, 1, 403a 3 - b 19); cette activite a lui, il peut l'exercer a part du corps (1178 a 22) , ce qui est aussi en contradiction formelle avec l'enseignement du traite De l'ame, pour qui il n'y a de pensee sans image. Cette activite, c'est de penser les choses divines (1177a 15), cette vertu c'est la philo . Divine par son objet et parce qu'elle ressemble a l'activite de Dieu (cf Metaph A, 983 a 6-7), cette activite n'en est pas moins la vraie vie de l'homme, puisqu'elle est la vie de l'intellect, et que l'intellect, c'est l'homme . Au dessus de cette activite qui lui est propre, l'intellect a une autre activite, qu'il n'exerce pas en tant que lui-meme, mais en tant qu'il est uni au corps: c'est de commander a la bete, de regler les passions, de diriger la partie irrationnelle (cf 1177a 14-15). Cette activite, c'est ce que vient perfectionner la vertu de sagesse (phronesis), qui apparait donc ici comme deja nettement distincte de la philo, ce qui nous invite a placer notre chaptire apres le Proptreptique, mais ce qui nous rapprocheencore de Xenocrate, qui fut le premier a esquisser la distinction entre sagesse et p[hilosophie (cf plus haut, p. 467) . Toutefois la sagesse n'apparait pas encore ici comme la vertu de l'intellect pratique, ni meme de la partie opinative, notions encore totalement etrangeres a notre texte, ce qui nous invite a en situer la redaction primitive avant l'EE, meme si, comme nous le croyonns, c'est Aris lui-meme qui l'a volontairement insere ici, mais sans avoir eu le loisir de le remanier comme l'aurait exige le development de sa pensee. ( Cf. "Evolution Historique" au debut du premier volume , particularly pp. 6 ff and p. 28, p. 30, p. 33).
