---
title: "REFLECTI"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/REFLECTI"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

Essay. 5 Chantilly, May 22, 93

Reflecting on Frei's Project

Large and fundamentally important portions of the Bible belong in the genre "realistic narrative." RN is a genre sui generis in which the meaning cannot be conveyed otherwise than by the narrative itself in all its particularity, which embraces characters, events, and cultural and natural environment. This meaning is common to RNs, whether historic (true or false) or imaginary (mythic, parabolic, fabulous...).

The distinctive meaning of this genre in the Bible has been lost, with what one assumes are significant negative consequences for our understanding of the Bible. For one fails to grasp what the Bible means by virtue of its saying certain things narratively, independently of the importance of the things said and of whether the passages are historical (true) or not. This is "the eclipse of biblical narrative." (Perhaps this can be extended to the humanities in general, if they rest on this narrative understanding. For the story told by Frei is not so much the story of the loss of biblical narrative, but the total devaluation of--and consequent inattention to--narrative meaning witin the scientific circle, where the important issue is true or false, historical or merely imaginary. In that the scientific mania has invaded academia even in the humanities, the same devaluation, with comparable consequences, is likely to have taken place there, too).

Frei retraces the steps that render the loss intelligible, armed with certain conceptual weapons. From Barth he learned to distinguish "historical from realistic reading of the theologically most significant biblical narratives, without falling into the trap of instantly making history the test of the meaning of the realistic form of the stories" (p. viii). From Gilbert Ryle, "the author's steady refusal to divide intelligent activity into separate mental and external components. It is a lesson well applied to the way one views written statements [texts?] and hence also how to read them" (ibid.).

As for the steps as retraced by Frei, a summary follows.

Western Christian reading of the Bible in the days before the rise of historical criticism in the eighteenth century was "strongly realistic, i.e. at once literal and historical, and not only doctrinal or edifying. The words and sentences meant what they said, and because they did so they accurately described real events and real truths that were rightly put only in those terms and no others. The most eminent among them [the parts which seemed most obviously to demand this reading] were those stories which together went into the making of a single storied or historical sequence" (ibid.). "... Christian preachers and theological commentators... envisioned the real world as formed by the sequence told by the biblical stories" (ibid.). "The preeminence of a literal and historical reading of the most important biblical stories was never wholly lost... It actually received new impetus in the era of the Renaissance and the Reformation when it became the regnant mode of biblical reading. From it, modern biblical interpretaion began its quest, in continuity as well as rebellion. Most important were three elements in the traditional realistic interpretation of the biblical stories , which also served as the foci for the rebellion against it." (ibid.).

"First, if... a biblical story was to be read literally, it followed automatically that it referred to and described actual historical occurrences ... This is a far cry from taking the fact that a passage or text makes best sense at a literal level as evidence that it is a reliable historical report. When commentators turned from the former to the latter interpretive use of historical meaning or used the two confusedly..., it marked a new stage in the history of interpretation" (p. 2).

"The second element ...was that if the world described... is a single world of one temporal sequence, there must... be one cumulative story to depict it . Consequently, the several biblical stories narrating sequential segments in time must fit together into one narrative... for joining them, make earlier biblical stories figures or types of later stories and of their events and patterns of meaning. It was a way of turning the variety of biblical books into a single, unitary canon... It was literalism at the level of the whole biblical story and thus of the depiction of the whole of historical reality. Figuration was at once a literary and a historical procedure..." (p. 2).

"... third, since the world truly rendered by combining biblical narratives into one was indeed the one and only real  world, it must in principle embrace the experience of any present age and reader... it was his duty to fit himself in that world of which he was in any case a member ... He was to see his disposition, his actions and passions, the shape of his own life as well as that of his era's events as figures of that storied world... its direction [ofbiblical interpretation] was that of incorporating extra-biblical thought, experience, and reality into the one real world detailed and made accessible by the biblical story--not the reverse"(p. 3).

This mode of interpretation broke down in the eighteenth century . The seeds of disintegration were already there in the seventeenth century (p. 4).

(1) " a kind of detachment of the 'real' historical world from its biblical description ." (p. 4). Instead of rendering the real events of history accessible, the narratives... now simply verify them..., thus affirming their autonomy and the fact that they are independently accessible by accurate description. It simply happens that the Bible contains the accurate descriptions. (p. 5). The depicted biblical world and the real historical world began to be separated, whether or not the depiction was thought to agree with reality. Hence inquiry into the factual truth or falsity of the biblical stories, as well as on their meaning and religious significance . Do the stories, or the concepts drawn from them, describe what we apprehend as the real world? The meaning of Genesis may be the same and common to all religions, whether allegory or fact. (p. 5). Meaning detachable from the specific story, but referable to an external pattern of meaning within which it now figures.

(2) The collapse of figural interpretation (p. 6) is another sign of te breakdown of the literal-realistic interpretation. Had been credible as an extension of literal meaning. But " figuration offended against the elementary assumption that a propositional statement has only one meaning " (p. 6).Once again, the interpretive demand now became reversed, and figuration found successors in such mirror-image categories of interpretation as allegory and, later, myth , which served for the classification of the biblical stories and their meaningful incorporation into an independent world of experience and of rational interpretation (p. 6). Literal and historical meaning were severed. Verbal or literal sense was now equated with the single meaning of statements , so that figural reading seemed a senseless exception. Thus the attempt to read unity into he Bible now appeared different from, if not incompatible with, the literal meaning .

Literal reading came to mean two things: estimating what a text had meant to its original audience, and coincidence of the description with the fact that had occurred. The latter was realistic reading.

Historical-critical reading became the heir of the older type of realistic reading. Historical critics were concerned with specific texts and historical circumstances, not with the unity of the canon.

The heir to figural reading, concerned with the unity of the Bible and with locating oneself and one's world vis-a-vis the biblical narratives was biblical theology, which sought to establish the unity of religious meaning across the gap of historical and cultural differences. Historical criticism and biblical theology were different enterprises and made for strained company, though the authority of the Bible was gravely weakened if it was neither unitary nor reliable (p. 8).

Biblical hermeneutic from the eigteenth century on is the subject matter of this book :

Literal sense is identified with the single meaning of a grammatically and logically sound propositional statement , independently of whether metaphorical, allegorical, or symbolic.

Beyond the verbal sense was the religious significance or "ideational meaning" of a text . What that was, whether it was intrinsic to the text or merely a particular use or application to which a text was put by some readers, became matters of vigorous disagreement.

Thesis ofthis book (p. 10): A realistic or history-like (though not necessarily historical) element is an obvious and important feature of many of the biblical narratives that went into the making of xtian belief. But since the precritical interpretive procedure for isolating it had broken down, it came to be ignored or even denied for lack of a 'method' to isolate it. In these stories depiction and depicted are inseparable ; meaning and narrative shape bear significantly on each other,even if one believes that the narratives bespeak an illusion. ( The claim, for example, that the gospel story is about Jesus of Nazareth as the Mesiah means that it narrates the way his status came to be enacted " (p. 13) "a cumulative account of the theme is indispensable" (ibid.). "subject and social setting belong together, and characters and external circumstances fitly render each other" Ibid.) "Action and passion in realistic narrative illustrate the same principle. Believable individuals and their credible destinies are rendered in ordinary language and throguh concatenations of ordinary events which cumulatively constitute the serious, sublime, and even tragic impact of powerful historical forces" (p. 15).

By contrast, for the prevailing hermeneutic , the meaning of the stories was different from the stories, despite the fact that this is contrary to the character of a realistic story, whereas previously the realistic feature had been identified with literal sense which in turn was identical with reference to historical truth, not with language-neutral historical veracity (p. 11).The confusion of history-likeness (literal meaning) and history (ostensive reference), and the hermeneutical reduction of the former to an aspect of the latter , meant that one lacked the distinctive category and the approrpiate interpretive procedure for understanding what one had actually recognized: the high significance of the literal, narrative shape of the stories for their meaning. AND SO IT HAS BY AND LARGE REMAINED EVER SINCE.
