---
title: "Chapter 8"
original_file: "/src/xavier/Files/More My Documents/wp/MONAS/CHAPEIGH"
original_format: WordPerfect
converted_date: 2026-01-20
converted_with: wpd2html
file_date: 1997-01-09
---

# Chapter 8: Biblical Categories and Aristotelian Categories

## Propositional Sense and Narrative Sense

Over the Anti-Aristotelians and the Non-Aristotelians Aquinas has, in respect of us, the great advantage of possessing a fully developed theoretical framework. Indeed, his position is supported by a theoretical infrastructure which he owes to Aristotle, thanks to whose views he was able to give shape to his comprehension of revelation, of faith, of the Bible, and of theology. By contrast, the position of the Anti-Aristotelians and the Non-Aristotelians has no comparable theoreticall infrastructure. It is simply informed by the intuitive comprehension that accrued to them from the practice of their faith and their familiarity with the canonical books and the para-canonical documents of the Christian tradition. As a result, their position is likely to appear to us as weak, if not simply parochial.

Now, some of the non-Aristotelians may well have been what today we would call 'obscurantists,' insecure people for whom any innovation represented a threat. But that, most certainly, was not the case with the Non-Aristotelians. They were as eager as Aquinas to find room for their faith within the Aristotelian epistemological framework which appeared to them to be indisputable, thereby insuring to their faith a harmonious continuity with the field of reason. Yet, they failed in their undertaking. What prevented them from achieving their project? On the basis of their own expressed reservations, I think that the answer is: an obscure sense of the incompatibility between the structure of their faith and the Aristotelian framework.

As to where my sympathies lie, the reader of this book has probably little doubt. For I have repeatedly suggested that Aquinas's undertaking failed, not because of lack of ability on Aquinas's part, but because it was bound to fail by virtue of a radical incompatibility between the Christian faith and the Aristotelian framework. And that Aquinas's failure resulted, not in a deformation of Aristotelianism under the pressure of the radically alien strictures of the Christian faith, but in a denaturation of the Christian faith--perhaps I should rather say, *a denaturation of our understanding of the Christian faith, in contradistinction with the practice of the Christian faith*--under the pressure of the alien strictures of the Aristotelian epistemology. Now that we are in possession of all the necessary pieces, the time has come to find out whether or not such an incompatibility actually exists.

## An Aristotelian model of faith

It is ekvident that Aquinas himself had no sense at all of the incompatibility of which I am talking. The reason is that he approached the analysis of the Christian faith with a mind already colonized by Aristotle. For him, more so that for any other of his contemporaries with the possible exception of Saint Albert, "the Philosopher's" voice represented the voice of reason at its best. Now, given Aquinas's absolute confidence in the truth of his faith and in the impossibility that reason and faith would contradict each other, for both proceeded from the same provident God, he had every reason to expect a fundamental harmony between his Christian faith and Aristotle's views.

Nothing in Aristotle seems to have impressed Aquinas more than the former's views on the intellect as the faculty capable of reaching the truth or, what amounts to the same, of knowing with certainty. To this intense epistemological interest Aquinas may have been predisposed by his interest, as a Christian intellectual, in the issues related to the truth of the Christian faith. Now, once Aquinas had appropriated Aristotle's views on the intellect, he was ineluctably bound to see what God reveals as analogous and complementary to the knowledge reached by the Aristotelian knower, and the act of faith as analogous to the intellectual act of judging through which the Aristotelian knower comes to know. As a consequence, he had to see the Bible, which conveys what God has revealed, as analogous to a scientific work whose purpose is conveying knowledge.

A particular aspect of the Aristotelian views appropriated by Aquinas demands special attention because of its bearing on Aquinas's understanding of the Christian faith in general and of the Bible in particular. Truth and falsity, for Aristotle, are exclusive predicates of judgements and, by extension, of the statements in which judgements find their natural expression. The reason is that, of all human acts, only judgements involve a truth-claim. Other expressions--such as commands, supplications, words of endearement, expressions of desire or aversion--as well as acts of other types, such as emotions or actions, neither are nor can be true or false, for they involve no truth-claim. Not even perceptual acts, at least according t6o the Aristotelian view borrowed by Aquinas, involve a truth-claim. If, for instance, I see a prestidigitator cut a human body in two halves, my act of seeing is neither true nor false, for I do not judge that the prestidigitator actually cut the body.

Lonergan has aptly characterized assent, as understood by both Aristotle and Aquinas, as follows:

"It is an act of the possible intellect. It is, accordingly, contrasted with consent which is an act of the will. The good is in things, but the true is in the mind; consent is a motion of the will with respect to the thing, but assent is a motion of the intellect with respect to a conception. Again, the object of an assent is on either side of a contradiction... We assent to first principles, to demonstrable conclusions, to the affirmations of reliable authority. *Assent occurs when we judge a conception of the thing to be true.* It must be motivated... In a word, *assent appears to be identical with judgment but to emphasize its subjective and reflective aspects; it is the judgmennt as a personal act, committing the person, and a responsibility of the person; it is the judgment as based upon an apprehension of evidence, as including an awareness of its own validity, as a truth in the subject rather than as a truth absolutyely and as a medium in quo reality is apprehended*" (*Verbum*, p. 61).

Assent is, therefore, a commitment to the truth of a judgement by the judging person. A categorical judgment is a grasp of what is the case as being the case and, simultaneously, as an unrestricted intellectual commitment on the part of the judging person to the case being such as judged. This unconditional commitment to the truth of what is judged, this "assent," is identical with the unrestricted truth-claim that categorical judgments possess and by which they differ from all other human acts in general and, in particular, from such other intellectual acts as opinating or doubting.

It follows from the preceding that, if the Christian faith is true, as it is for Aquinas, it has to involve judgements and to be expressed in categorical statements. Hence Aquinas's model for faith: assenting to what a person states, not on the basis of evidence, but of the authority of the person who makes the statements. In the *Summa* and concerning the Christian faith in particular, this model takes concrete form in the all-pervasive analogy between God, "the author of the Bible," and a teacher. What a teacher does is what Aristotle does in his *Metaphysics*: to express his judgments by means of statements, and to support them with the evidence that has compelled him or her to judge that the case is such as stated. Insofar as the evidence presented by the teacher is capable of eliciting the same judgments from the students, the students will come to share the teacher's knowledge. Analogously--but only analogously, because of the highly significant difference that makes possible the assent characteristic of faith--what God does in revealing is to state His own intuitive knowledge,* *but* without supporting His statements with any evidence whatsoever. Insofar as people come to assent to God's statements on God's authority, they come to share God's infallible knowledge without however, in this life, sharing in God's intuitive vision of the objects of His knowledge, much as a child who believes what his father says without for the time being sharing the evidence his father possesses for what he says.

\* "Faith is a kind of knowledge, inasmuch as the intellect is determined by faith to some kind of knowledge" (Ia, 12, 13, ad 3). "It was necessary for man's salvation that there should be a doctrine revealed by God, besides the philoso-hical disciplines investigated by human reason" (Ia, 1, 1).

This allows us to grasp *the absolutely central role that Aquinas attributes in the Bible to statements, with which he identifies its literal sense.* Indeed, if the Bible is God's word, and if God's word is true, the Bible's literal sense *has to* consist essentially of statements. In the process, however, Aquinas identifies the historical sense of the Bible with the literal sense, as we saw in the preceding chapter. The "signification by which words signify things belongs to the first sense, the historical or literal" (p. 16). The literal sense is "the first sense" because it is the sense on which "all the senses are founded" and "from which alone can any argument be drawn" (I, l, 10; ad 1; p. 17). This sense "is called history, whenever anything is simply related" (p. 17).

Clearly, *this amounts to reducing the historical sense of the Bible to the sense of statements, that is, to the only sense that interested Aristotle in his scientific works*, for it is the only sense from which arguments leading to scientific--that is, universal and necessary--conclusions can be drawn. That this and no other is the kind of arguments Aquinas had in mind is obvious from the rather expeditious way in which he disposes of the blblical statements that refer to particular characters and contingent events. Indeed, from such statements no scientific conclusion can be drawn because they are neither universal nor necessary.

## An alternative model of faith

From Saint Paul on, in the Christian tradition, Abraham, "the Father of the faithful," has been taken as the paradigmatic example of faith, following of course the Jewish tradition. Surely, then, *if Aquinas's model of faith is basically the same as that of the tradition, as he must have assumed it was, his model should be glowingly verified by Abraham's case. If faith, then, is the intellectual act of assent to what God states, we should see Abraham assenting to what God states.*

We could refer ourselves to the whole biblical story concerning Abraham, but a portion of it will suffice for our present purpose. Nowhere is Abraham's faith more powerfully portrayed than in the scene of the sacrifice of his own son. It is to be remarked that we are dealing with a scene, that is, with a narrative passage, with an episode of the developing history or story of Abraham. However, if one approaches the Bible with the preconceived idea that God's revelation consists of statements, and conceives God as the Author of the Bible, the temptation to understand the Bible as implicitly prefaced by the words "God stated that..." is irresistible. In which case the passage that concerns us, where God orders Abraham to go to the mountain and sacrifice his son wil be composed of a series of statements to which the faithful have to assent: *that* God ordered Abraham to go to the mountain, etc. *Given his epistemological model* and his corresponding notions of revelation and of faith, Aquinas cannot help assuming that the Scripture *states that* God ordered Abraham to go to the mountain and sacrifice his son. And, since this is a statement or a series of statements whose author is God, we are supposed to assent to it or to them on God's authority. Most certainly, however, that is not what Abraham did or was supposed to do in this case. For God had stated nothing; God had given him an order to be obeyed or disobeyed, not made a statement to be assented to or dissented from. God had communicated to Abraham no piece of knowledge susceptible of being expressed in propositional form and of being true or false. In other words, Aquinas's model does not fit the case of the Father of the faithful.

The faith by which Abraham became the Father of the faithful did not consist in assenting to the fact that God had given him an order, which in any case was not a fact stated by God, but in obediently going to the mountain to sacrifice his son out of his total reverence for Yaweh. And such, clearly, is the sort of faith which the rest of the scriptural passage shows, for it contains no divine statements to which Abraham could possibly have assented.

Aquinas's model of faith simply does not fit at all a passage to which it would have to fit if it were the right model. In fact, this passage itself furnishes the concrete model which Aquinas should have made his, but did not because it did not square at all with his Aristotelian preconceptions. Now, it seems to me, on the basis of the analysis conducted in chapter 5, that the faith of which the Fathers were talking, that is, the traditional understanding of faith, is informed by the concrete model furnished by the story of Abraham, which, needless to say, differs abysmally from Aquinas's own.

*It is at this point* that we may start appreciating the profound difference between Aquinas, on the one hand, and the Non-Aristotelians and Anti-Aristotelians, on the other. For one of the latter's fundamental reservations concerning the possibility of a scientific or even quasi-scientific theology had to do, precisely, with the narrative structure of the Bible which, as is the nature of narratives, deals with particular characters and events and is meant to produce perlocutionary effects in its readers--such as love and fear--which are very different from the assent meant to be produced by statements. Now, this objection cannot be taken lightly. After all, there are good reasons to think that the Bible may well not be a work of the genre Aquinas, constrained by the Aristotelian frame of mind he had thoroughly appropriated, assumed it was. What if the fundamental, literal sense of the Bible is narrative rather than assertive? And what if the narrative sense is irreducible to the assertive or propositional sense that alone interested Aquinas and with which he identified the literal sense of the Bible?

## A narrative model of faith

Whether or not the Bible is a sacred text that contains God's revelation, it is sure that it contains certain passages that are narrative, of which the one referring to Abraham is an example. Again, whether or not this passage is historical in the modern sense of the word, that is, refers to real persons and real events of the past and is at least to an extent verifiable by the "trace" it left (cf. Ricoeur), it is sure that the passage has the shape of a story. Now, stories are narratives. The word "story," however, in our modern parlance, connotes a narrative that is not historical but purely fictional. Since I do not want in any way to prejudge the question of the historickal or fictional character of the Bible, rather than using the words "story" or "history" in reference to the narrative passages of the Bible I will use the neutral word "narrative."

My thesis is the following: (a) The fundamental literary genre of the Bible is narrative. (b) Narratives--whether Biblical or not--possess or convey a sense of their own which cannot be conveyed but by a narrative. This sense is irreducible to any other sense, and in particular to the propositional sense. I will designate the sense to which I am referring by the expression "narrative sense."

Needless to say, the core of my thesis is not new at all. I am indebted for it mainly to Hans Frei's enormously influential book *The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative*. However, since this thesis constitutes an essential piece in the present work, I will try to make it persuasive to the reader in my own terms, independently of whether Frei would or would not recognize his own position in the one I will present as mine.

What is a narrative? The biblical scene of the sacrifice of Isaac is a a concrete example. Speaking in a very general way, a narrative is a presentification of the events in which a person or a number of persons participated by shaping the events and being shaped by them. These participants are usually called "characters," and I will follow this usage. In the passage I am referring to, the characters are Yaweh and Abraham. The events are obvious, starting with God's order to Abraham, through Abraham's conduct in response to it, to the final outcome.

Narratives possess certain characteristics. The sequence of events is temporal, that is, not only are the events narrated interconnected in an irreversible order of before and after but, if this order were altered, either the events narrated would become unintelligible, or if they kept any intelligibility the significance of the narrative would be changed. This is to say that the sequence of events is not purely temporal, in that the events are connected in their sequence by a certain 'narrative or dramatic logic.' Of course, this 'logic' is not the logic of demonstrative arguments; it is, rather, the 'logic of life' as lived by human beings. What do I mean by this? Roughly, that the characters in a narrative find themselves in the initial situation as all of us find ourselves in life in any dramatic situation: with a certain comprehension of the present situation and the challenges it poses kto us and to others, with certain desires and fears as to the possible outcome, and with no absolute certainty as to the final outcome, since the future is always contingent and partly dkependkent on the actions of the involved people. Of course, each of the characters will, to the best of his or her abilities, promote the realization of the outcome he or she ultimately prefers under the circumstances, and will have to face the new circumstances created either by nature or by the other characters until the final outcome that terminates the narrative or the episode of a narrative takes place. I call it a 'logic' in that it confers to the narrative the structure by which it is intelligible. And, to distinguish it from the logic of life, for our life may be the basis for narratives but is not itself a narrative, I will call it 'dramatic logic.' I call it this way because the intelligibility of a narrative is structured around, or obtains thanks to, the outcomes desired or feared by the characters, which may or may not coincide with the final outcome that takes place actually at the end of the narrative. Indeed, if human beings were totally indifferent to what may happen to themselves or to others under whichever circumstances, narratives would become mere *factual* descriptions of a sequence of events passively and indifferently undergone by humans, instead of being what they actually are: *dramatic* narratives. This is to say that narratives are dramatic by definition, which is what distinguishes them from descriptions in particular and, in general, from all literary pieces structured according to a non-dramatic logic.

It is important to keep in mind the distinction between the time-space of the author and the reader, on the one hand, and the time-space of the characters, on the other. For the author and the reader, the time of a narrative is past (if what is narrated actually occurred, if the stuff of the narrative is "historical"), or it is imaginary time. In both cases, the author may know the final outcome before writing or telling the narrative. The reader may also know the final outcome if the events are "historical," and even if they are imaginary, if the reader has already read the narrative at least once. But, for the characters themselves, their time is like ours in life, their future is as unknown and contingent as ours is. And it is into the time of the characters, imagined or reproduced by the author, that the reader of a narrative enters as a spectator.

All the above applies, of course, to the biblical narratives, leaving aside the fine and complex distinctions that would be pertinent concerning God as a character, given His prescience and omnipotence, and which make of Him such a special "character" in biblical narratives.

I come now to part (b) of my thesis, starting with the point that *narratives convey a sense of their own, which cannot be conveyed otherwise than by a narrative.* This is what I call the "narrative sense."

The narrative sense is the sense that a competent reader of of a narrative is meant to get *as a reader of a narrative* rather than of piece of any other literary genre. Of course, the knowledge of the particular language in which the narrative is written is required to qualify as a competent reader. In addition, however, to this kind of understanding, the ability to understand a narrative *as a narrative* is required. To distinguish the "language" (English, French, Spanish, etc.) in which a narrative is written from what I am talking about I will call the latter the "idiom" of narratives. "Idioms" are parasitic on but not identical with "languages." A narrative has to be written in a certain "language"--Chinese, Aramean, English, French, etc. But a demonstrative argument, or a lyrical poem, which also have to be written in a certain "language," are not thereby narratives. In fact, a demonstrative argument and a lyrical poem exemplify "idioms" or "genres" which are different from each other and from the narrative idiom. Being a competent reader of demonstrative arguments is being capable of following them as demonstrative arguments, so as to be able to understand the conclusion as a conclusion to which one will assent or with which one will dissent. Similarly, being a competent reader of lyrical poems is being capable of following them as lyrical poems, so that the characteristic linguistic effects that lyrical poems are capable of producing in their readers may obtain. In a similar way, then, *being a competent reader of narratives is being capable of following them as narratives, so that the linguistic effects characteristic of this particular "idiom" or "genre" may obtain in the reader.*

## Locutionary effects: illocutionary and perlocutionary

I have spoken of "characteristic effects" in reference to the "idioms" I used as examples, because "idioms" differ among themselves by the effects they are capable of producing according to their respective natures. If, for instance, assent is the characteristic effect that a demonstrative argument is meant to produce, for such an argument is nothing else than a statement with its supporting evidence as required by the people to whom the argument is addressed, assent can hardly be considered the characteristic effect of a lyrical poem where, as the saying goes, "the poet afirmeth nothing."

In this connection, it is important that we avoid a common misunderstanding that would be fatal in our context. The misunderstanding consists in believing that grammatical sentences--be they oral or written--can be understood independently of their particular 'literary genre.' The grammatical sentence "Go to hell" is not understood at all if it is understood as an order, because it does not express a command. If I respond to this sentence or utterance by refusing to go to hell, I misunderstood the utterance, I am an incompetent hearer of English, though I may have the illusion that I know the English language because I understand the meaning of each of the words.

In *Speech Acts* Searle distinguiuished between illocutionary and perlocutionary effects. Language is not a thing there, that exists complete in itself, like a brick ready to be used for purposes of construction. The French language, for instance, does not exist apart from speakers and hearers of French. It is constituted by "speech acts," that is, acts of speaking and hearing, which are correlative and complementary to each other. You speak so that I hear, and I hear because you speak. Now, we tend to think that speaking is picking up chunks of an already constituted, pre-existing language to build a sentence, much as one picks pre-existing bricks to build a house. The speaker builds the house, and the hearer retrieves it by understanding it. The speaker *says* something, and the hearer retrieves this *something* by *hearing* it, where hearing stands for understanding.

Though Searle thinks in terms of speech acts rather than of bricks, his idea of speaker and hearer ends up corresponding to the one I just presented. Language is constituted by speech acts, which are speaking and hearing. Speaking is saying something intelligible, something to be understood. Hearing is retrieving what was said by understanding it. What the speaker intends is the said by him or her to be understood. This is the *illocutionary* effect of language, that is, the effect that any genuine piece of language is capable of producing, given the nature of language, the effect that any person capable of speech acts intends as a speaker and receives as a hearer. Competent speakers are people who say something, and competent hearers are people who understand it. Apart from this, the speaker may intend other locutionary effects, that is, other linguistic effects, other effects apart from understanding which that language, given its nature, is capable of producing or at least orf meaning to produce. Thus, as a speaker, I can give you an order by using a sentence in the imperative: "Fetch me that spoon." As in every case in which language is used, I as a speaker intend an illocutionary effect, that is, that the said by me be understood by you, the addressee. But, in this case, I also intend a perlocutionary effect: that you pass me the spoon. In Searle's view, the perlocutionary effects of speech acts are parasitic on the illocutionary effect, in that they can neither be intended nor obtain but on the basis of the illocutionary effect. The illocutionary effect, therefore, is common to all speech acts; the perlocutionary effects are characteristic of particular acts, such as commanding, threatening, praising, insulting, etc.

This view is, in my opinion, mistaken. It arises from taking the declarative sentence--the case of "*saying* something" in the sense of stating, of predicating something of something--as the paradigmatic example of speech acts. This kind of sentence has, or at least appears to have, a particular property. What is said can be detached from the perlocutionary effects while keeping its meaning or intelligibility in its integrity. *"Humans are rational animals" is a declarative sentence by which no other than the illocutionary effect is intended or even normally intendable.* This is Searle's model of the speech act: saying something that can be understood. The illocutionary effect, that is, the *"meaning," the "content,"* is detachable from all perlocutionary effects and, therefore, clearly different from them. *This amounts to identifying meaning with a piece of information given by the speaker and received by the hearer (or the witness), and the perlocutionary effects as parasitic on a piece of information from which they are separable while remaining intelligible.* The sense or meaning of language is self-contained and independent from perlocutionary effects.

I think this is wrong.

If I tell you "Your mother is on the phone," I intend linguistically the perlocutionary effect of your going to the phone to talk to your mother. It seems as though I intend two things: informing you and making you take the phone. Indeed, without saying anything, I could take you to the phone and thus obtain the perlocutionary effect in a non-locutionary way. Thus, it wpuld seem that the perlocutionary effect is different, even separable, from the illocutionary effect that characterizes all linguistic pieces. But such is not the case. *What I intend locutionarily is to bring you to the phone*. I do not intend to give you a piece of information at all, if by "piece of information" we understand something to be simply understood, that is, decoded and stored in your mind, to be retrieved at will later. Of course, I could bring you to the phone by other non-locutionary means, but that would not be the same at all, for neither my action nor yours would be locutionary, that is, linguistic.

Other people interested in speech acts have spoken of *performative* speech acts. The umpire who shouts "out" is *performing locutionarily*, putting the player out. He is not declaring, that is, giving a piece of information and, *in addition*, putting the player out. He is simply putting the player out, linguistically or locutionarily, much as the judge who condemns is not informing and condemning but simply condemning somebody who is by the same token locutionarily condemned. My point is that *all speech acts of the "involved mode," are performatives in intention,* and that *being a competent user of language is being capable of meaning and grasping all and each speech acts of this mode as performatives.*

What about declarative sentences? Language is a communicative relationship, which is primarily spoken and only derivatively written, between two or more persons. This is to say that *we might make a bad mistake if we try to theorize about language as if it were primarily written and only derivatively spoken.* We all were introduced to the linguistic universe through talking, not through writing. And, historically, humankind talked long before writing. Now, speaking of talking involves at least two people. *The original linguistic act is not talking to oneself, but talking to others and with others*. Furthermore, *the original communicative situation is not aesthetic but practica, in the "involved" or "exposed" mode*. By this I mean that the fundamental, though not unique, function of language is coping with the surrounding world, not enjoyment or anything else that would presuppose a bracketing of action. It is fundamental for the same reason that survival is fundamental, for without survival all the other functions of language could not obtain or be of any use.

Assuming that the above notations are correct, certain implications follow. We talk in a given situation, in the situation with whose immediate challenges we have to cope to the best of our abilities and according to the outcome each of the participants ultimately prefers, given the circumstances. If, in a movie house, I shout "Fire!," I am using a "performative." I am not communicating a piece of information to be understood and stored in memory; I am *urging* other people to live, much as I am *blackmailing* when I tell somebody "I will kill you now if you do not give me the money you have in your pocket." The other is *thereby blackmailed*, much as the player is *outed* by the "out of the umpire. If the 'other' continues to seat placidly in the moviehouse, or does not start taking his money out of his pocket, or tries to go to bat at the next turn, this person did not 'understand,' that is, is an *incompetent linguistic agent* at least in this singular case. Suppose the blackmailed answered: "I understand what you say," or even "I believe what you say," that is, I assent to what you say, and proceeded to continue walking as if nothing had happened. Obviously, the blackmailed had not understood what the blackmailer said, for he understood it as a piece of information to be stored, not as a particular performative to be responded to appropriately.

Thus language in the involved or exposed mode is primarily performative. At least at this point, 'understanding' = 'performing,', and 'meaning'= intending something to be linguistically performed. Moreover, this meaning is directly related to the immediate situation constituted in part by the mutual presence of the speaker and the hearer or spoken-to, and in part by the immediately surrounding circumstances, such as the movie-house, the stadium, the place where the poor guy is blackmailed.

I return to Searle. Can language be rightly understood as constituted essentially by its "illocutionary" effect, which is common to all pieces of language? I don't think so. I believe that language is characterized by its being capable of producing perlocutionary effects, and that there is no such a thing as the illocutionary effect of language, much less that the latter is separable or even different at all from the perlocutionary. Of course the perlocutionary effect is a locutionary effect, for otherwise it would not be linguistic; but it is perlocutionary, not illocutionary.

Having made my position clear, I want to spell it in more detail as to certain of its implications. The first is that *there is nothing to understand in a linguistic piece, if by understanding we mean simply getting the sense of what is said and of what the speaker thereby intends.* The reason is that no linguistic piece, not even declarative sentences, say anything, if by saying something we mean something purely intelligible; linguistic pieces are not saying or predicative pieces, they are performative pieces. Being a competent linguistic agent is being capable of grasping appropriately the *performative force* of pieces of language--not, as Searle claims, the "illocutionary force"--, according to the particular role one plays in the situation. The meaning of language is identical with its perlocutionary force, but the *perlocutionary force varies according to the roles occupied by the participants within the linguistic situation*. There is the role of the addresser, the role of the addressee, the role of the witness, all of whom are present to the situation. And there is the role of the linguistic contemplator.

The speaker and the hearer are participants. Suppose, however, that I am watching the scene of the blackmail from a window above, but without any chance to interfere with the action. I am not a participant. I am a witness. This fact, however, does not disqualify me from being a competent linguistic agent, though I am not a participant in the actual linguistic situation. If I understand the scene as anything else than as a case of blackmailing, I am an incompetent linguistic agent, at least in this case. Now, I, as a witness, am 'informed' of the blackmailing that is taking place. But neither the speaker is informing nor the balackmailed is informed or being informed. Moreover, it is not quite true that I am just being informed, as a witness. The scene 'moves' me. To simplify things, I am shattered, I am revulsed by the wantonness of the blackmailer, I am scared for the blackmailed's life, I am sorry for him, etc. And, no less important, if I were in the position to prevent what is going on--that is, in the position of a participant in the situation, though not in in the role of the blackmailer or the blackmailed--I would feel called to do something and would feel bad about myself, guilty, if I did not do something.

Suppose, now, that I read in the paper: "Yesterday evening, on Main Street, a man was blackmailed into giving all he had in his pocket." Here we are in written language, one of whose characteristics is that it is removed in space (and usually in time) from the situation in which action is possible. Here I am 'informed'. Even here, however, insofar as I belong to the same town, this information may make me fear and worry and take certain precautions in the future.

## Searle and Predicative sentences

Searle grants that linguistic utterances do not mean. Speakers mean, and hearers understand. They are thereby constituted as "competent." But he also makes the meaning dependent on (identical with?) the uttered in a particular language. Can he have it both ways?

His paradigmatic case of communication demands sincerity on the speaker's part. This applies to predicative sentences. The speaker believes what he says. But I can say something without believing it. Therefore, even in the speaker's case, believing and understanding are different.

*This seems to imply that understanding is the same on the speaker's part as it is on the hearers, and that the hearer is the model*. But then, a language is a ready made meaningful tool: The pieces of language mean by themselves. Their *intrinsic* meaning is what *they* say. The speaker uses them to communicate his primary intention (being understood, which coincides with understanding what the sentence says), and *to produce perlocutionary effects, which themselves are connected with what the sentence says: giving for begging, assenting for predications, etc. Now, Searle denies that utterances mean by themselves and in themselves.*

Searle has an apparent scoop in the fact that I can understand something without believing it, understand a command without obeying, understand an act of begging without giving. But his scoop is only apparent. As insincerity is a second order intention parasitic in the first order intention constitutive of linguistic communication, so is the illocutionary force or sense which Searle identifies with meaning.

The speaker's understanding of commanding, at least initially--that by which the speaker is constituted as competent, native speaker--is identical with his command. The speaker does not first understand as commanding the sentence he will use, and then attacches to it his intention of commanding such and such. If such were the case, then language would mean by itself, which Searle denies. In a parallel way, the speaker does not first understand the declarative sentence he is going to use, and then believes it. Assenting, like sincere speech, is the paradigmatic case. Why?

"There is fire in the theater." Would a child who understood the words but did not register that he should live understand the sentence? I don't think so. Would Searle say that a speaker who utters a declarative sentence but who has no hint of what uttering it sincerely, that is, believingly, understands it? I don't think so. In other words, being a competent speaker involves being capable of grasping as a linguistic agent, not reflectively, not only the sense (what Searle calls "meaning") but also the perlocutionary force of what one says, without which one could not possibly has the perlocutionary intentions Searle grants speakers have. But are these two different and separable things? In that case, in the example of fire, the child I mentioned would have to be declared by Searle a competent hearer and speaker. Yes, one can predicate something believingly and unbelivingly or doutfully, but one cannot just predicate as a parrot would predicate, for that is the nature of the predicative speech act. Conversely, one can hear something believingly or unbelievingly or doutfully or even suspending judgment, but one cannot hear a predicative sentence without taking a stand as to its truth, for that is the nature of hearing. Suspending judgment is a stand in respect of the predicated and of the speaker. As one cannot disbelieve a speaker's statement without disbelieving the speaker, and one does not make two acts. Much as Searle acknowledges that one cannot refer without speaking Believingly, disbelievingly... are modalities of speech acts, but all speech acts are modal and cannot but be modal for they are speech acts.

A further point. All speech acts are performative in relation to the speaker, and intentionally performative in relation to the hearer. The speaker who commands constitutes himself as commander by commanding, by conveying his intention linguistically through a commanding sentence, much as the umpire constitutes the player as outed by shouting "out." Now, language is a communicative practice that cannot subsist at all without the cooperation of the participants. The fundamental sanction of the lack of cooperative communication is the rupture of communication, which can be sustained without the total dissipation of communication only as long as it is not systematic and is only incidental. He who makes systematically disbelieving predications defeats the communicative purpose of predicating, and will pay the price of not being believed. He who systematically commands without consituting himself as commander will not be obeyed. He who begs without intending to receive will be given nothing when he begs sincerely. In fact, all that Searle says about "sincerity" can be extended to all the other speech acts; they should be "sincere," that is, express the real intentions of the speaker. Now, though there is no corresponding word to "sincerity" on the hearer's side, the same rupture of communication (resulting in ostracism) and ultimate dissolution of the communicative community would obtain if commands were systematically disobeyed ('unheard'), demands unheard, salutations unacknowledged, etc. Commands, by the very nature of the intention they express are to be obeyed, demands satisfied, salutations acknowledged...

Where does this leave us concerning the question of "understanding"? If I do not realize that by commanding I constitute myself as commander and expecting obedience, by predicating (to the addressee) I constitute myself as believer of what I say and expecting to be believed, I am not a competent speaker of language. Now, predicative sentences seem to be special in that they involve not only the question of sincerity but also the question of truth. And this question involves its proper rules. Assenting is not primarily a matter of free decision, as obeying and order or consenting to a demand may be; it is a matter of judging, which does not obtain without sufficient reason as judged by the hearer. While I admit this difference, I will deal with it later. Moreover, the fact that there is a personal element on the hearer's part does not make this case exceptional. Obeying an order and consenting to a demand involve that too. Were that not the case, obedience *to* an order and disobedience would not exist, nor consenting or refusing to consent *to* a demand. But on all this, more later.

To return to "understanding." My difference with Searle is that he makes "meaning" the correlate of "understanding," and he equates meaning with "something to be understood." I already showed that no speech act demands such kind of understanding.

But "understanding" is a particularly dangerous word, for we tend to reserve that word particularly for statements, that is, for predicative speech acts which do not seem to demand from the hearer any particular external conduct but only, at best, mental assent.

The result, if we take Searle's view on meaning, is that we might tend to separate cleanly, as Searle does, the illocutionary force and effects of speech acts from their perlocutionary force and effects, and then to confuse the illocutionary force and effects of all other speech acts with the illocutionary force and effects of predicative statements.

Searle writes:

"When I say 'Hello', I intend to produce in the hearer the *knowledge* thjat he is being greeted. If he recognizes it as my intention to produce in him that knowledge, then he thereby acquires that knowledge (p. 43). [He attributes this to Grice, whom he criticizes: "Thisaccount of meaning does not show the connection between one's meanming something by what one says, and what that which one says actually means in language. Secondly, by defining meaning in terms of intended effects, it confuses illocutionary with perlocutionary acts... *but* saying something and meaning it is a matter of intending to perfomr an illocutionary, not necessarily a perlocutionary act" (43-44).

"... saying something and meaning it is a matter of intending to perform an illocutionary act... many kinnds of sentences used to perform an illocutionary act... many kinds of sentences used to perform illocutionary acts have no0 perlocutionary effect associated with their meaning. For example, there is no associated perlocutionary effect of greeting. When I say 'Hello' and mean it, I do not necessarily intend to produce or elicit any state or action in my hearer other than the knowledge that he is being greeted. But that knowledge is simply his understanding what I said, it is not an additional response or effect... Secondly, even when there generally is a correlated perlocutionary effect, I may say something and mean it without in fact intending to produce that effect. Thus, f. e., i may make a statement without caring whether my audience believes it or not but simply because I feel it my duty to make it." (46).

Meaning, therefore, equals knowledge, equals illocutionary force or intended effects. I disagree.

If I salute, a witness knows that I saluted X, but the witness is not himself saluted. X not only knows that he is saluted; he is saluted, whereas the witness is not. Does being saluted amount to knowing that one is saluted in the same way that knowing that somebody else is saluted? If saluting is meaning to convey the knowledge of saluting someone, it is. And, in this case, we have a reduction of meaning and of illocutionary force to knowledge, which is what predicative speech acts addressed to someone intend to produce. That is, as I suggested above, the illocutionary is clearly distinguished from the perlocutionary and the illocutionary force of all other speech acts is reduced to, and confused with, that of statements, of predicative speech acts. Why do I reject this?

When I state I intend to convey knowledge which will be acquired by the other in the measure the other assents to what I said. But surely I do not intend the same when I salute, or I command, or I demand. An appropriate response to my statement is "I agree" or "I disagree." But I would consider such response inappropriate in the latter three cases. In fact, if that is the response I received from X when I salute her, I would surely know that she misunderstood. And, if I received such response consistently from her to my salutations, I would consider her an incompetent user of language, an incompetent linguistic agent, for she takes salutations for statements.

Searle is likely to reply that he equates the illocutionary force and effect with knowledge, not with assent or dissent, which he considers perlocutionary effects. Even in that case, I think he is wrong. When I make a predicative speech act, I intend to convey knowledge to my interlocutor. But do I intend to convey knowledge when I salute her? Sounds queer, at least to me.

When I make a predicative speech act (a statement) I mean both to express my belief in the truth of the statement and to share that knowledge with the adressee. But when I salute her I do not intend to convey any knowledge I possess; I intend to salute her. Since I have said nothing susceptible of being assented to or dissented from, I would find any response of that kind utterly inappropriate--a case of misunderstanding. What is this kind of knowledge Searle has in mind? It cannot be shared knowledge, for I do not mean to share any knowledge with the person saluted. It is, furthermore, nothing susceptible of being assented to or disssented from, which is typical of linguistically shared knowledge. In what way, then, is it knowledge?

Let us, however, charitably consider the possibility that what is typical of speech acts is to produce knowledge, but not of sharing knowledge, and that the latter is only the distinctive perlocutionary intention of statements, whereas the former is the illocutionary effect of all speech acts. Perhaps this is what Searle has in mind. Having saluted X, I know that I saluted X; X knows that I saluted him; and a witness knows that I saluted X.

Have we not here a piece of knowledge that is shared but not stated by anybody, in particular not by the speaker?

This kind of "knowledge" would be about a linguistic fact, but is not itself a linguistic fact anymore than seeing a tree is a linguistic act, for it is not meant by the speaker. When a speaker wants to convey knowledge, a speaker states; a speaker does not salute, or demand, or command. It seems strange that speech acts, that is, linguistic acts, would be characterized and defined by a non-linguistic effect.

It seems to me that Searle's mistake consists in trying to find a quality that is common to all speech acts independently of the respective particular effects that they are meant to produce. Well, what is common to all linguistic acts is that they are communicative acts. And communication obtains in the measure that the speech act is meant and hear as, according to its particular nature it ought to be meant and heard. An insincere statement is not a statement at all, though it sounds as a statement and can be heard as a statement, for a statement by its very nature demands assent of the speaker to the stated as much as it demands assent by the hearer. As a speech act, a statement that is not believed by the speaker or by the hearer is not a speech act, for it does not communicate, though perhaps it was meant to communicate by the speaker, or taken as meant to communicate by the hearer. The same can be said of a command that is not meant to be obeyed or that is not obeyed.

Yet, Searle's position seems plausible. After all, I can 'understand' or 'know' that you meant "I love you" as a declaration of love for me, without loving you in return, or 'unerstand' or 'know' "Please, give me a piece of your bread" as your begging me, without giving you a piece of my bread. True. But we have to go more deeply into the nature of language. It is the nature of language to communicate. A linguistic agent is an agent who is capable of participating in linguistic communication in the roles of speaker or hearer, that is, of intending linguistic effects as a speaker and of cooperating in the achievement of those effects as a hearer, and reciprocally. What the speaker minimally and essentially intends is to achieve linguistically the effects signified by what the speaker says. If he states something, he intends that to be believed. If he begs for something, he intends beggingly to be given what he begs for. If he salutes, he intends the other to take himself as saluted by the speaker. A speaker who does not intend that is not using language; he is ab-using language, he is giving the impression that he is using language. A speaker does not intend to be purely 'understood.' Imagine a language in which Searle's illocutionary effects always obtained, but what he calls the perlocutionary effects never obtained. Statements would be understood as statements, but neever believed; commands would be understood as orders, but never obeyed, etc. Would such a language function as language? Would its speakers function as speakers and its hearers function as linguistic hearers? Could a hearer who thinks that statements are not to be believed, that commands are not to be obeyed, that demands are not to be consented to, function as a speaker in his turn and make statements, give orders, make demands? Yet, if Searle were right, that would be a language!

Nonetheless, there is the illusion that language is 'understood' in the way Searle thinks. From where does it arise? From objectifying language, from thinking *about* language, from contemplating the linguistic situation rather than living it as a participant. When one reflects on language, one neither speaks as a speaker nor hears as a hearer participating in the linguistic situation. One contemplates them. One 'understands' what the speaker says and what the hearer hears, but one is not speaking or hearing. Obviously, the speaker does not 'understand' what he says by hearing what he says. And, since hearing is correlative and reciprocal to speaking, the hearer does not 'understand' what the speaker says, for it is not meant to be understood. Searle's understanding is an abstraction. There is no mental operation called 'understanding' that precedes, and is different from, the speaking conduct and the hearing conduct. The speaker intends linguistic effects by intending them linguistically and the hearer responds linguistically by responding. The hearer of "out" responds linguistically by 'acting out.'

Now, why am so interested in debunking Searle's views on the illocutionary?

Why do I deem them to be, not only wrong, but dangerously wrong? Because I think they perpetuate the very intellectualistic mistake that the notion of speech acts should help us to overcome. *The intellectualistic mistake consists in separating the intellect from the will, the emotions, and the conduct. In making of knowledge an autonomous thing, complete in itself, and the necessary foundation for emoting the emoted, willing the willed, and acting the acted.* This is what Plantinga does by separating believing that God exists from believing in God. *This is what Aquinas does by reducing faith to intellectual assent, thereby making faith independent from "feelings" and "behavior"*. *This is what Aristotle did by identifying truth with the truth of reflective judgments, of the judgments of a pure contemplator and by making of knowledge (the judged) the foundation of all other human acts*.

Suppose I am right. What follows for my purposes?

(1) I can pass to the question of literary genres as speech acts given and received as such, and apply this to the narrative (dramatic) genre. Establish the parallelism, or at least the analogy between speech acts and literary genres.

(2) *I can disqualify Aquinas's understanding of the Bible as constituted by predicative sentences* asking for assent, and of faith in God as assent to what God says. For narratives neither state anything nor can be assented to or dissented with. The same with God's revelation.

## Narratives as comprehensive speech acts, as "idioms" or "genres"

A narrative is a speech act whose speaker is its author and whose hearer is its readers or its public. It is *one* complex speech act. It is characterized by the intrinsic effects of the genre. The author may narrate for his or her own ulterior purposes, but he cannot attain those purposes without obtaining and intending the linguisticd effects characteristic of the genre. Thus, the author may narrate to entertain, or to earn his living, or to convey a message he wants to teach. But he *narrates* to realize his particular purposes. Thus, his purposes are parasitic on the intrinsic purposes of the narrative and will not obtain without the intrinsic effects of narratives being intended and obtaining. What are these effects?

A narrative is a presentification of dramatic events in which a character or characters participate, by means of which a competent reader or hearer of narratives is made present as an ideal witness as if he were there.

By *dramatic events* I mean events that terminate in an outcome that accords or discords with the desires of the characters, but which in any case is not neutral, that is, neither in accord nor in discord with their desires.

*The dramatic tension of a narrative*, which is what gives the narrative its unity, consists in the tension between the outcome desired by each of the characters and the uncertainty of its accomplishment, with the correlative consequences for the central characters. Of course, the outcome desired by one of the characters may have be different and in conflict with the outcome desired by another or others.

The distinctive characteristic of the temporality of narratives is that it replicates the temporality of human life, where the future is always contingent and, therefore, unknown until it becomes present. Unknown does not necessarily mean unforeseen by the characters, but with the fallibility characteristic of human foreseance, where the unforseen is always absolutely possible.

The reader is made present to the action and the characters, which are inseparable from each other in a narrative, as an *ideal witness*. By this I mean that the reader or hearer is there as if he witnessed the action, but without being able to intervene in the action. As is the case with an actual witness, this does not prevent the reader from preferring a certain outcome to other outcomes and, thus, from identifying himself with one character by preferring the outcome preferred by that character and by suffering and rejoicing with the character. *In fact, it is the very intrinsic effect of narratives that the reader be present in this way, as an ideal witness*. Being a competent reader of narratives is being capable of this mode of presence. Being a competent teller of narratives is being capable of creating the conditions for such presence of the reader to the action. A narrative is as good, as a narrative, as it is capable of producing this form of presence of the reader to the action.

Narratives, therefore, are intrinmsically dramatic. In this they differ from descriptions, which are a-dramatic.

The *author's voice*, whether heard or unheard, is always there. A narrative may replicate the structure of life, but it is not life itself. It is a speech act that obtains by replicating the structure of human life and making the reader present to a chunk of life as an ideal witness.

Needless to say, there are infinite possible variations of the features of narratives, depending on the author particular purposes.

## The Bible as a narrative

The Bible is a collection of heteroclite books of very different genres. Yet, there is a sense in which, as a whole, it can be considered as a narrative work. Indeed, the reading of the Bible *as a sacred book* has always 'followed' it as a narrative. Why?

There are in the Bible books of very different genres: sapiential, legislative, prayerful (Psalms), etc. These books, however, make sense within the whole on the basis of the narrative books. The prayers are addressed to Yaweh, one of the central characters in the narrative books. The legislative books present the laws by which the people of Israel, another of the central characters, lives its relationship to Yaweh. In short, the narrative passages are "selbständig," intelligible by themselves, but the non-narrative passages or books get their proper intelligibility only by their relationship to the narrative passages or books, which are connected with each other as a sequence of episodes moving toward a desired outcome which, by the end of the Bible, is still to come and desired by the participants in the action.

The biblical whole, then, possesses a narrative unity in spite of the variety of its authors. Correlatively, there is also a certain unity to the authorial voce, in spite of the variety of its individual authors. What characterizes this voice is the fervent allegiance to Yaweh on each of the author's part. Yaweh is not only the main character, but such a character as to demand and command--and, in the authorial voice--deserve the total allegiance of the readers. A particular reader may come to despise and hate Yaweh for his arbitrary ways and his cruel demands. In fact, it is very much the right of the reader of the Bible, as it is the right of the reader of any narrative not to sympathize with the authorial voice. But a reader of the Bible as a narrative who would not realize that in doing this he is at odds with the authorial voice and with the main characters in the successive episodes, would not 'follow' the Bible as the particular narrative it actually is, for that reader would not be an ideal witnes to the action actually narrated.

Now, as a fundamentally narrative work the Bible is meant to produce the intrinsic effect by which the narrative genre is characterized. This effect consists in the reader's presence to the action as an ideal witness who reacts to the action and to the characters and, accordingly, suffers and enjoys with the "action," depending on the partial and the final outcomes the reader desires and his reaction to the characters and the authorial voice, which in this particular case *ideally* should consist in the reader's sympathetic identification with the allegiance of the main characters and of the authorial voice to Yaweh.

Let us provisorily identify this unique "allegiance to Yaweh" as a sort of "faith." Let us now compare the Bible to a love story: Romeo and Juliet. No reader of Romeo and Juliet can help sympathizing with the two young lovers and desiring the outcome they desire and they finally do not achieve. The authorial voice is such as to practically insure this "linguistic" effect, without which the story would hardly make any sense. Thus, although the authorial voice is nowhere explicitly heard, it is all over by the kind of story the author tells and the way he tells it.

Romeo and Juliet is a love story. A story of love because the love between Romeo and Juliet is its central subject. A story because the reader ideally witnesses it as being present to its development, with the dramatic temporality--uncertain, contingent future outcome desired and striven for, whether actually achieved or not. Love, as Saint Thomas said, is "velle bonum alicui." This is a definition, it abstracts the common structure of all loves, whoever the lover and the loved, whatever the circumstances. But what is velle bonum, and velle bonum alicui in particular? When asked "Who is my neighbor" Christ responded with an example, with a little narrative; not with a definition. Why? Because a definition of a human relationship, even the most apt definition, is an abstraction of the intelligible in singular cases and can mean only by reference to singular cases. And this is so because only what is intelligible can be understood and defined/ Velle bonum alicui? Christ would have answered with the parable of the good samaritan.

Two points to remark. The parable is not told in a dramatic form. And it is not told in a dramatic form becasuse the purpose of telling this story was not to presentify it narratively but to teach a point, to answer a question. What the interlocutor wanted was to understand, to come to know what he did not know. Now, a narrative may be used to answer a question, but it is not of the nature of narratives to answer questions, while it is of the nature of narratives as such to make the reader present to the action as an ideal witness, as if he had been there.

The point I am after is why the Scripture had to be a narrative, why it could not produce the effects it is meant to produce but by being a narrative and, consequently, why an understanding of the Scripture that presupposes that the Scripture conveys knowledge and demands assent is wrongheaded.

As all stories, the Scriptural narrative is told to hearers-readers. If what it wanted to produce was assent, it would have been a collection of statements. But it is not; it is a story. And a story is a genre that does not demand assent and to which assent and dissent are inept responses to it. If God's revelation consisted in something that demands assent, the Scripture, whose point is revelation and faith, would be made of statements and examples of assent to the statements. Thus what I am after is: *of what sort have to be God's revelation and its correlative, faith, so that they have to be narratively expressed.*

One can approach the Bible with the questions "What is God's revelation?", "What is faith?". In that case one is looking for knowledge, which will take the form of predicative statements. On this level I disagree with Aquinas. We differ in our respective reflective understandings of revelation and faith. However, we share the same faith. Let us call our point of disagreement "cognitive interpretation." And let us call our point of sharing *"practical comprehension."* What I hold is that this practical comprehension has to be formulated in a mediating story, not in statements.

The implicit term of all perceptual experience is the subject who experiences. Experience is always organized around the named or unnamed subject who experiences: in front or behind me, to my right or to my left, above or below me. Distances unfold from me or, what is the same, toward me.

In the act of experiencing I am given to myself (experience myself experiencing) as much as I experience the objects of my experience. But when I remember and formulate my past experience (of having seen a tree to my right) I do not experience myself as seeing the tree, for I am not seeing the tree anymore. So I have to formulate my particular experience by formulating explicitly both the object experienced and the subject experiencing. This is not experiencing anymore, but formulating the experience, which cannot be adequately formulated without the object (tree) the subject (I) and their relationship (I *saw* a tree). In *other words, the subject of the experience becomes explicit.*

Our perceptual experience, however, is experience in a context, in a given spatio-temporal situation. I do not just see a car. I see a car in the street, moving away from me or toward me.

*Perception is of the order of interaction, of need-desire and vulnerability. It is strucutred toward the future desired, toward the realization of the desired outcome. Carthago est delenda Romanis, defendenda Carthaginensibus.*

*We perceive as witnesses or as involved participants.* We do not notice this when 'everything is under control.' That is, when we do not desire or fear anything intensely, or when what we desire is not prevented by obstacles that make its achievement uncertain. It is the inverse case that shows the dramatic character of experience and that distributes it into episodes. That is why we spontaneously narrate our experience, though we tend to remember and narrate only significant events.

Actual experience is lived dramatically, toward a desired outcome that is contingent, for which we strive or which we at least desire, but without ever having the absolute certainty of achieving. We know the end of the episode at the end, when the outcome obtains, be it the desired one or a different one. It is always success or failure. And only a narrative preserves the dramatic structure of our experience and its flavor. Because of this, it is, apart from the actual witnessing of the events or the comprehension that accrues to actual participation in them as one of the agents, the only adequate means of communicating an experience to somebody. And because narratives recreate imaginarily the events while prserving their spatio-temporal-dramatic structure of lived experience.

A narrative, however, is not the lived experience itself; it is, even in the case of autobiography, an intepretive formulation of the experience of somebody as deemed to have been lived by the subject.

Our interactions, and therefore our experiences, do not only involve us as subjects, but also other subjects who are sometimes involved as participants in the same events, who may or may not desire and pursue the same outcomes I do, and who will accordingly enter into my story with a positive or negative coefficient of adversity in relation to my desired outcome.

Perceived objects, as we saw above, move us to action, depending on the situation, because we are present and exposed. The world immediately perceived is our immediate field of action and passion in relation to the objects perceived. We do not first perceive and then are moved to act. Perceiving is being moved to act; we perceive instrumentally, hodologically. We have the illusion that perceiving and being moved to act are two different things because we reflect on perception as pure contemplators, precisely when we are not exposed, when we are not involved as agents, when therefore the moving ability of the object is neutralized. But this is not perceived object, it is reflected object. Then, of course, we have the unsolvable problem of the passage from "is" to "ought," which rests on the wrong assumption that perceiving amounts to seeing, and that being moved is not a a constitutive of perceiving. As Sartre says, perceiving and acting are two moments of the same.

Images, whether perceived as images or only imagined, keep their moving power. Being moved is being moved to act, to respond. But in respect of images we are not in a position to respond. Narratives are images of persons involved in action, as we all are in our lives, but understood as images, without any possibility to interfere with the action. Thus, they keep the moving power of perceived objects, but without calling the perceiver, or the imaginer, or the hearer, or the reader to action. *Carthago est delenda* for me, but not delenda by me, if the outcome I desire is Rome's prosperity. This is the kind of effect characteristic of narratives, which is, on the author's part, underpinned and intended by the authorial voice, and on the reader's side by the 'social personality' of the individual reader. The reader of *Lolita* usually identifies with Lolita, but a sadist may identifiy with the protagonist.

A competent writer or teller of stories is capable of producing such identification on the reader's part, with important variations that depend on the particular purposes of the author: to entertain, to explain, to convey knowledge of people and events, etc. A competent follower of narratives is capable of following the characters and events as being moved by them in the particular way defined by his/her identification, which ideally is the one intended and pursued by the authorial voice. People who are totally incapable of being so moved are incompetent linguistic agents, as shown by the fact that this is one of the genres preferred by children because it is connatural to us from the fact that we live our life and the lives of others dramatically. Of course, one may continue to love the narrative genre, in which case one will be an avid reader of dramatic works (plays, novels, history...), as one may become an avid watcher of football games, which are dramatic games and demand, as such, to be followed as dramatic games, identification and being moved on the spectator's side.

Is there a following of narratives as narratives that does not involve this kind of ideal participation (identification and being moved)? I can tape a tennis match and then watch it to study the technique of one of the players. But then I am not following it as a tennis match, as the spectacle was meant to be watched by the spectators. And I would be badly mistaken if I claimed that that is the way tennis matches, as tennis matches, are to be followed. The same with narratives. They are to be followed and understood as narratives. And, for that, the typical participation of the reader of narratives is essential. The same with the author of a narrative. Life is dramatic in that persons in situations desire outcomes that are uncertain and contingent partly on their actions or lack thereof. There is no possibility of understanding a scene of life as we people live it without some idea of the possible outcomes, of the outcome or outcomes desired by the respective participants, and--since it is a scene that has consequences in the world in which one participates by being alive--of not preferring one outcome over others. If I witness a fight in the street between two people unknown to me, I may be neutral as to the outcome preferred by each of the fighters, but I am not neutral as to the outcome I prefer: the fight to be stopped by somebody, the fight to last because I get enjoyably excited by that kind of spectacle, etc. If I have no idea of the possible outcomes of such a scene and of the outcome preferred by each of the contenders, I do not follow the scene, I am an incompetent witness of real-life scenes. Now, I may not identify myself with either of the contenders. But I identify myself with myself; I am myself, who does not desire the outcomes desired and pursued by the contenders, but I situate myself in regard to the scene as preferring a certain outcome: that the fight lasts long and end with a lot of blood (without which I will be disappointed), or that the fight be immediately stopped. In short, I cannot see a dramatic scene, as a dramatic scene, without desiring an outcome and being moved accordingly, much as I cannot follow an argument as an argument without grasping that the outcome pursued is persuading, and without being persuaded or not persuaded, or considering the argument silly because the issue itself is based on presuppositions which I do not share. (This, for instance, is my case in relation to arguments for or against the passage from is to ought).

But suppose I follow a fight understanding the outcomes desired by each of the fighters but without idkentifying with either of them and without myself desiring any outcome in particular. Is such understanding possible?

*This seems to be Searle's* 'understanding' of the 'illocutionary force' of language.

Such understanding of a scene of fighting is not possible. Why not?

One cannot be a competent hearer if one is a totally incompetent speaker, for one cannot understand what is intended *of him* without having any experiential idea that a speaker intends necessarily intends something linguistically when a speaker speaks. I can understand what a speaker says to a hearer by saying "Come here" without myself saying it, and even without identifying with the speaker as a commander of this command. But I cannot understand his "Come here" without understanding that he linguistically intends the other to go to where the speaker is, because, let us say, for whatever reason the going there of the hearer appears to me undesirable--because it is dangerous, or because the speaker has no right to command the hearer, etc. But I cannot understand that X is commanded if I do not understand that the speaker has the intention to command. Similarly in the case of a fight. I cannot understand a fight as a fight without understanding that the fighters have the intention to hurt and avoid being hurted, and without some experience of what pain and humiliation are. And I can have no idea of what a fight is if, for me, pain--or at least my pain--is painful and my humiliation humiliating, for inflicting that to the other while avoid receiving it is the intention without which the fighting behavior is not a fight. In short, I cannot be indifferent to my pain and humiliation if I am to function as a human being who understands a fight, and without understanding that for the fighters their own pain and humiliation are painful and humiliating (undesirable) and the other's pain and humiliation desirable. Now, as a witness of a fight, I cannot possibly take a *neutral* stand to their inflicting and receiving pain and humiliation, for I am a perceiver confronted with it; it happens in my world, in the world I share with them. I have to take a stand toward these two people who intend to inflict pain and humiliation while avoiding it. My stand may be that I do not care for these two people while I care for the pleasure that their fighting gives me. But this itself is not neutral, it is a way of being moved by identifying with myself. Thus, if our question is whether it is possible to witness a fight as a fight without being moved to prefer an outcome, the answer is no. The same with Searle's understanding of an order. Commanding is preferring the outcome of being obeyed by the person commanded, as fighting is preferring to inflict pain and humiliation and to avoid receiving it. The person commanded is put in the linguistic situation of being commanded, as the outed player of Searle's. But the hearer is *a subject who prefers, and constitutes himself as preferrer of, an outcome*, too. His disobedience or his verbal refusal constitute *his* linguistic self in the given situation, as much as the commanding of the commander constitute his own linguistic self in the situation. Speaking is creating a linguistic situation by constituting himself as preferrer of a linguistic outcome expected from the hearer or hearers who is or are thereby constituted as part of the situation in a determined role to which they cannot be neutral, since it is an end to be pursued by them, and an end is determined by its being preferred by the pursuant.

*I-Thou communication is intrinsically dramatic*.

*But what about the hearer-witness, which seems to be Searle's model for the illocutionary?* He is also a subject, creator of situations (linguistic and others), preferrer of outcomes which may be by "identification" those of the participants, or his own in respect of the given situation.

But he cannot be neutral. If he interferes with the action, enters the situation as an agent, boviously he prefers an outcome. If he chooses not to interfere, he prefers the outcome of not being involved and the fight to continue or to be stopped by somebody else. It is from this standpoint of preferring-being moved that he understands the fight as a fight. But he cannot see a fight as a fight from a neutral (unpreferential-unmoved) standpoint.

Going to a match of tennis or to the theater is going as a watcher of tennis or of plays. Reading a narrative is following as a reader-watcher of the narrated, which is intrinsically dramatic and to be understood as such. One can interrupt reading or watching. But one cannot read a narrative without reading it as a narrative, as dramatic. And this amounts to identifying oneself with the outcome of the participants or identifying with oneself as preferrer of a different outcome to the situation, or at least being indifferent as to the actual outcome by being indifferent to the people involved in the action, which is a preferential attitude toward them and their preferred outcomes. In a situation of salutation, refusing to salute because one does not care is preferring an outcome humiliating for the person. In witnessing a non-salutation, one can only be indifferent by preferring not to care for either person and their preferred outcomes, which is the preferring-being moved from which one understands a denial of salutation. But one cannot understand a dramatic situation neutrally, that is, by being neutral, by not understanding the dramatic situation as a situation that imposes preferred outcomes, for this would amount to understanding it as a-dramatic.

What I want to say is that narratives are to be followed by preferring outcomes and being accordingly moved, and that otherwise they are not followed as narratives, as presentifications of dramatic situations. One may know that it is a narrative, if at all, but at any rate one does not follow it as a narrative.

Suppose I am right and all this applies to the Bible as a narrative. Then what? Then revelation is a dramatic interaction between God as self-revealer and man as revealed to, inseparable from the I-Thou interaction by which God constitutes Himself as self-revealer and man as revealed to by responding to God as God meant to be responded to by His very interaction.

Then the Bible is meant to be read as a narrative of this dramatic interaction, and therefore the reader is to be partisan and consequently moved.

But, again, is there no neutral understanding à la Searle?

First point: Language is communicative and its paradigmatic use is situational. *Human experience itself is, paradigmatically, situational and dramatic, in terms of uncertain outcomes to be achieved*. Therefore, there is no genuine articulation of human experience if this structure of human experience is not preserved. This is what narratives do. Being a human agent is choosing among the outcomes that appear possible in the situation the one to be pursued or avoided.

Obviously one can understand preferred outcomes without preferring them oneself. But one cannot understand them without understanding them as preferred by an agent. Thus, in any case, there is no separation between outcome and preferred, for an outcome is outcome not as state of affairs but as preferred and pursued state of affairs, much as a situation is situtation in terms of a preferred outcome, with the consequent coefficient of positive and negative instrumentality of the elements of the situation for the subject.

*Thus, in any case, for the involved participants, there is no possible separation between understood and desired*. There is nothing like first understanding and then desiring. One understands by desiring and desires by understanding.

The witness may not desire the outcomes preferred by any of the participants. But he cannot follow the developments without grasping the outcomes preferred by the participants as preferred.

*Without that, the witness does not witness the events.*

The witness can be witness only because he is an agent-patient, a situational experiencer who prefers *certain* outcomes and for whom preferring outcomes makes sense. For without this the witness would have no idea of outcomes and of situation.

Whoever does not read the Scripture situationally, as a narrative, is not presentified as an ideal witness, whether or not he considers the events real.

Since the Scripture is a speech act, it has an authorial voice which involves certain preferred outcomes which articulates the preferences of the protagonist(s), or the preferences of the author, or both insofar as they genuinely coincide (which in fictional narratives is always the case). But the reader as ideal wittness brings to the following of the story his own 'reader's voice.' Whether or not the reader's preferred outcomes coincide with the auhorial preferred outcomes, in both cases *the reader has preferred outcomes, not just understanding of preferred outcomes.* *In fact, this is part and parcel of following a dramatic narrative as a narrative: making sense of preferred outcomes and resonating to characters and events on the basis of ideally preferred outcomes*.

Let me check this by reference to Searle's neutral understanding. His model of language is based on his hearing of language as a philosopher curious about language, not as involved in the linguistic situation. His "illocutionary" or "meaning of language" is what always obtains for a philosopher curious about language. But is this what obtains for the speaker and the hearer in the paradigmatic linguistic situation?

*Only if understanding and preferring are separable*. But speaking is communicating a preferred outcome, and hearing is being communicated a preferred outcome either as preferable or unpreferable in terms of the hearer's own preferred outcome. In his turn, the witness, whether ideal or real, understands the outcomes preferred by the participants only in terms of his own preferred outcomes. Even his indifference is a manifestation of his preferences in the situation as being such as not to demands preferring any particular outcome.

*But this is very different from Searle's understanding*, for whom there is a common understanding by the speaker and the hearer of a certain neutral meaning independent of the outcome or outcomes preferred by the speaker, the hearer, or the witness. Words say what *they* mean. No. This is an illusion. The speaker means his preferred outcome by expressing, and the hearer hears it by expressing his preferred outcome, which may be the same or different from the speaker's.

This might be explained by the case of sincerity. There is no such a thing as insincerely meant. By definition, as Searle admits, the meant is sincerely meant, or it is not meant. There is, however, the utterance of words to create in the hearer the illusion of a preferred outcome. Expressing a preferred outcome is pursuing the outcome--that is speaking. Hearing is as active as speaking in the interactive linguistic situation: it is pursuing a preferred outcome by expressing it communicatively. And reading, the correlative of authoring, is, in the case of narratives, ideally expressing a preferred outcome, much as the spectators in a foot-ball match, by resonating positively or negatively to the events and the characters that pursue certain outcomes. But while reading is a non-communicative activity, hearing as an involved agent is. Hearing is responding to the outcome meant as preferred by the speaker by preferring that outcome and bringing it about, or by preferring a different outcome and attempting to bring it about.

Thus, the distinction between illocutionary and perlocutionary is illusory. *The effects of language, in the paradigmatic situation of encounter, are always perlocutionary, whether the perlocutionary effects intended by the speaker obtain or not.*

*To bring an end to these notes for chapter eight with a reference to Frei*: His position is that narratives are to be followed by readers as narratives, where events and characters are inseparable. I have to pay attention to this inseparability.

But it seems to me that *he considers the "content" of narratives without sufficiently considering them as speech acts*, as expressive of the preferred outcomes for the author and, consequently, *as intrinsically meant to produce on the reader's part, if aptly followed, ideally preferred outcomes that move the reader because they are understood and are understood because the reader is moved*. Of course, "content" and "moving understanding" are correlates. Only such content can produce intrinsically such effects by being followed appropriately, mcuch as only statements can produce assent and commands obedience or disobedience.

*Why is this complement to Frei important?* Because, as underscored by him, the Bible has been understood as the result of a referring speech act; more clearly, of an act meant to produce assent or dissent by referring the reader to the world he knows. Clearly this cannot be the case of fictional narratives, which is one of his strong points. If narratives mean, they mean to produce different effects by portraying characters inseparable from events. So far, so good. But his book is about the loss of *biblical* narratives. My point is that biblical narratives express, and are ideally meant to produce in their readers, or at least to re-excite in them, the moving-understanding of God's self-revealing in which faith consists. In other words, the Bible does not only have incidentally the particular content it has. It has that narrative content because it is meant to express and excite or re-excite the unique self-revelatory history of God and the unique response to it in which faith consists. As long as we think that revelation is a sharing of knowledge in a long statement and faith an assent to it on the basis of God's authority, we may live the Christian faith but at the price of being at odds with our understanding of it, which creates impossible problems. The reading of the Bible cannot give us faith, but at least it can give both those who believe and those who don't a more apt basis for the discussion of their differences than the one we have nowadays.

## Searle's perlocutionary

He rightly affirms that often the perlocutionary effects intended by the speaker do not obtain, and nonetheless the hearer understands. What then is wrong?

Searle identifies understanding with the understanding of a witness, not with the understanding of the adressee: knowing that. But the speaker means it as a performative. The addressee is out, the adresse is saluted, the addressee is being linguistically loved when the speech act succeeds. This may become knowledge, but is not knowledge anymore than knowing that I was ashamed is the same as being ashamed or knowing that you are ashamed is the same as being ashamed. In the witness-pure contemplator, knowledge may be the effect, but it is not the effect characteristic of language, for it is not the effect meant by the speaker, and it is not the effect undergone by the addressee.

Yet the perlocutionary effect intended may not obtain. Begged by you, I may not give. It is characteristic of linguistic effects that they may not obtain, for the hearer, too, is a subject, author of his actions as the speaker is author of his speech acts. In this, however, linguistic action does not differ from any other action, for the intended effects of any action may not obtain. You intended to kill me, but you failed. The fact that I understand this and a witness understand this does not imply that you intended to share with me the piece of information that you intended to kill me. The difference is that *linguistic actions, unlike others, are cooperative actions* that depend on the coooperation of the addressee. But Searle's point is that speaking essentially involves the willingness to inform you of my intentions, whereas killing does not. My point is that speaking essentially involves the intention of the effect to be cooperatively performed. By blackmailing you I intend you to become linguistically blackmailed, not to inform you that I am blackmailing you. But, if the effect does not obtain, what do I have to say to Searle? After all I understood what you said, and I refuse to be blackmailed. I reply that what constitutes me as a hearer is my refusing to be blackmailed, not my understanding what you said. Understanding language as an addressee consists in responding appropriately to you speaking, not in getting a piece of information about your intentions. If when blackmailed by you I do not refuse or accept to perform accordingly, I am not a hearer of language. If when saluted by you I do not refuse or accept your salutation, I am not a hearer of language. In fact, even the 'understanding' of the witness-hearer is of this kind, for he understands the blackmailing as a performative intention and the acceptance or refusal of the blackmailed as a performance in response. Someone who understands the blackmailer's words but does not understand them as threatening is an incompetent hearer. The action of refusing is as linguistic as the action of accepting being blackmailed.

Furthermore, abstractly, if we are to understand linguistic action, the speech act has to be defined by the cases in which the effect intended by the speaker obtains in the addressee. For if it were defined by the cases in which it does not obtain, begging would not take place, much as if we defined stating by the cases of insincere stating. And then, the words of begging, of blackmailing, of stating would become unintelligible in the sense in which Searle considers it intelligible, for they would mean nothing. Language means because linguistic intentions of the speaker succeed most of the time under the appropriate circumstances. In a society in which nobody consents when begged begging would be unintelligible, all the sentences expressing begging would be unintelligible. Being a competent speaker of the English language is being capable of begging, of consenting when begged, and of grasping as a witness the perlocutionary orperformative force of begging and being begged.

*This is connected with the intellectualistic fallacy.*

*And with statements in particular.* Indeed, statements have the particular characteristic of referring the speaker to something else than the action to be performed by the hearer. "The pencil is on the table." I refer you to the world, not to yourself as performer. And, if assent is demanded, it is assent to the said, not to me directly.

*This leads people to think (1)* that statements are purely objective judgments or descriptions of the world to be compared to either with the world itself or with my own judgment of the world; *that statements are mere propositions about the world and, thus, that one understands them by understanding them a la Searle.*

(2) That, as Searle does, this way of understanding language applies to all other speech acts and that it is the condition for the other effects which are called "perlocutionary" by opposition to the common meaning of language which is illocutionary.

The content of a judgment appears detacheable from the speaker and the hearer, capable of being considered by itself.

This appears to be true only when one takes the pure contemplator's position characterized by the pure desire to know.

Certainly the pure desire to know is not the primary intention of people in lingustic situations where statements are made and heard. Insofar as statements refer to the world, they refer to it as constituted by objects of exposure. I say "The pencil is on the table" only to guide your practical action, not to inform you of a neutral matter of fact. I refer you, therefore, to an object of exposure. Consequently, I do not expect from you mere intellectual assent, but practical response to the object as stated. "The pencil (for which you are looking) is on the table." I want you, given your desire, to take it. Taking the pencil (in the ideal case), or refusing to take it, are the only appropriate responses that constitute linguistic understanding. Thus, in everyday life, statements are not mere propositions for consideration in view of their truth.

*Their case is no different from other speech acts as to their performative character.* Of course, the performance involved is not the same as in begging or commanding, but it is performance nonetheless. Thus, understanding a statement as a pure understanding of the stated à la Searle is as wrongheaded as a pure understanding of the commanded.

A further step. Asking whether a statement is true is already a way of neutralizing its practical referring effect, of interrupting the communication; for it is hearing it as a mere proposition when it was meant as a statement. This may happen either because what you state contradicts my actual perception or my belief, or because I distrust you. If I am primarily interested in "reality" as to be contemplated, which was Aristotle's case, and consider perception on the model of pure seeing and as not full knowledge, I equate a proposition with a perception, I consider the truth-value of the proposition, and I end up assenting or dissenting. The proposition represents the first stage (perceiving--which did not interest Aristotle because of its particularity and contingency--and prospective understanding or hypothesizing); the assent represents the second stage: assent to what is perceived or understood. Now, what the speaker supposedly communicates to me is an understanding of the object to which the speaker assents--a judged to be so. But *I understand by understanding à la Searle what he says, the said*, which in my turn I will take as a prospective understanding to which, depending on the circumstances, I will assent or dissent. If I assent, then I will be referred to the object as real, that is, as known contemplatively and to be known explanatorily.

"The pencil is on the table." For Aristotle and Aquinas it is a matter of whether I can rationally assent to this neutral fact, for only on that basis can I desire the pencil and act in it regard. This truth is speculative and it yields reality. To reach this kind of truth is the supreme goal of man. It is the ultimate desirable by reference to which all the rest is really desirable and undesirable insofar as it leads us to the fruitional contemplation in vision of that reality.

Do I deny that the pencil is on the table? No. But I deny that the pencil is on the table if it cannot be object of desire or aversion or desire to anybody in any context. That it is actually constituted as reality known by being actually averted or desired by somebody as pencil on the table. That this can only occur in a dramatic context. That from there we can abstract its reality in itself for future encounters in other dramatic contexts in the future.

*My final point: Is knowing a condition for desiring or averting?* The question is equivalent to: Is Searle's understanding of language a condition for responding appropriately?

The question itself presupposes a distinction between knowing and desiring, between understanding and responding. My point is that responding appropriately is understanding, that there is no understanding where there is no appropriate response, which of course varies with the roles occupied in the situation; but *the paradigmatic case of hearing is the case of the addressee, not of the witness*. He who exposed to fire does not understand fire as fearful and himself as vulnerable does not understand fire. Our understanding of fire 'in absence' is a sedimentation of our practical understanding. A physicist's understanding of fire is explanatory of the 'nature' of fire: from what fire does (and is done) to what fire's nature is. Not only is this understanding not in presence of exposure to fire, but an abstraction (however useful) from the dimension of exposure, and therefore a bad model for understanding and knowledge.

All this has to be replaced in the *dramatic* context of desired and feared outcomes.
