---
title: "Chapter6.xom"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/Chapter6.xom.wpd"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v2.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

Chapter6.xom.wpd

Revised 04/27/2000 Chapter Six

      The object of Faith

One of the ways in which Aquinas divides his study on faith is by considering the "act" of faith and the "object" of faith.

In the former case he concentrates on the subject of the faith-relationship, that is, on the believer; in the later case, he focuses on the term of the faith-relationship, that is, on what is believed. Having already explored the first, we move now to the second, after a short recapitulation.

Where are we, at this point? What the Fathers call "faith, is by its very nature a relationship whose term or "object" can only be the God they recognize as God, the God of Christianity. In taking as his model for faith the relationship of trust between two persons--the one who trusts and the one trusted--and in specifying that in the act of faith the trust in the God who reveals is the "principal," whereas the assent to the particular truths revealed is "secondary," Aquinas seemed to have not only made his the Fathers' notion of faith, but even added some welcome precision concerning the acceptance by the believer of particular truths that is involved in faith. Nonetheless, at the time we came across Aquinas's model of faith I expressed certain misgivings. It seemed to me, indeed, that Aquinas saw faith as a relationship to God as reliable concerning the matters He revealed , either exclusively or at least principally, whereas the faith of which the Fathers spoke  was not particularly, much less exclusively, a relationship to God as veracious. Initially, however, it appeared conceivable that the difference between Aquinas's notion of faith and the traditional one was fundamentally a matter of emphasis rather than of substance. I must confess, however, that the detailed examination

of Aquinas's analysis of the act of faith I undertook in the preceding chapter did nothing to convince me that the difference was merely superficial. Quite the contrary. For not only did Aquinas practically bypass in his analysis what he himself had announced as "the principal" in the act of faith, namely, God himself rather than the truths revealed, but his heavy concentration on  faith as assent to particular truths and his  relegation of the will to a merely extrinsic role indicated that, caught within the gravitational pull of Aristotle’s intellectualistic epistemology, Aquinas really conceived faith as a fundamentally intellectual relationship to the “doctrines” revealed rather than as a relationship of the whole person

Himself. At any rate, a close examination of Aquinas's views on the "object" of faith will surely help us to find out whether or not his notion of faith is the same as that of the tradition, for it will clarify the way in which he sees God in the faith-relationship.

The object of faith

What is the object of faith? This is the question with which Aquinas opens his treatise on the object of faith. "The First Truth," he answers (II, IIae, 1, 1) . Of course, the First Truth is God. Thus, the object of faith is God. One might, thus, feel inclined to conclude 0that for Aquinas as well as for the Fathers "faith" is faith in God . But would the preposition “in” as used by Aquinas express the same relationship to God as the same preposition as used by the Fathers and in the Nicaean Symbol?

 It is noteworthy that in defining the object of the faith-relationship Aquinas pointedly gives precedence to one particular aspect of God. For he does not refer simply to God, as the Fathers would have done if asked what the term of the faith-relationship is, but to God as the First Truth, that is, to God as incapable of erring and of lying. This seems to indicate that, for Aquinas, "faith" is trusting God as omniscient, infinitely veracious, and absolutely infallible, and, consequently, believing, that is, assenting to each of the truths revealed by God on the basis of His authority.

How, concretely, does Aquinas construe divine revelation? revelation? From God seen as the First Truth what one naturally expects is true statements. And that, precisely, is what divine revelation consists in, according to Aquinas: what God reveals is a special kind of knowledge that complements the knowledge reached by reason left to its own forces.

"It was necessary for man's salvation that there should be a doctrine revealed by God , besides the philosophical disciplines investigated by human reason. First, because man is directed to God as an end that surpasses the grasp of his reason... But the end must first be known by men who are to direct their intentions and actions to the end. Hence it was necessary that certain truths which exceed human reason should be made known to him by divine revelation. Even as regards those truths about God which human reason can investigate, it was necessary that man be taught by a divine revelation. For the truth about God, such as man can know it, would only be known by a few, and that after a long time, and with the admixture of many errors ; whereas man's whole salvation, which is in God, depends on the knowledge of this truth " (I, 1, 1).

I underlined a number of words and expressions in the above passage to make clear the heavy epistemic character of Aquinas’s notion of revelation. It all is a matter of knowledge and truth to which everything else is subordinated. What God shares with us through revelation is the knowledge He possesses. And, lest we miss his point, Aquinas himself underscores the parallelism between that which is obtained through the natural use of reason, which of course is knowledge , and what is revealed by God. Consequently, what one gains through faith is knowledge , too, the knowledge revealed by God. That, is why the act of faith, for Aquinas, is

--indeed, has to be-- an intellectual act, an act of assent, for only through such an act can a person acquire knowledge.  "Faith," as Aquinas asserts categorically, "is a kind of knowledge, inasmuch as the intellect is determined by faith to some knowable object" ( I, 12, 13, ad 3; p. 111) .

True, Aquinas does not simply equate with knowledge what the faithful gain through faith, for he is keenly aware that knowledge is based on "vision," whereas faith for all its superior certitude does not involve an assent compelled by evidence. This difference, however, does not, in Aquinas’s eyes, invalidate the analogy between what is gained through the natural use of reason and what is gained through faith, for the difference is only temporary and obtains only in this life, as he takes care to point out repeatedly: "the chief object of faith consists in those things which we hope to see in heaven" (II, IIae, 1, 6). "The object of the heavenly vision will be the First Truth seen in itself" (II, IIae, i, 2, ad 3).

For Aquinas, as for Aristotle, the ultimate happiness of the human being consists in the contemplative fruition of truth. The difference between them is only that what Aristotle attributes to the natural strength of reason and limits to this earth, Aquinas sees fulfilled--partially and inchoatively in this world, fully in the world to come--thanks to a supernatural elevation of the intellect by God:

"... the perfection of the rational creature consists not only in what belongs to it according to its nature, but also in that which it acquires through a supernatural participation of the divine goodness. Hence it was said above that man's ultimate happiness consists in a supernatural vision of God. To this vision man cannot attain unless he be taught by God... Now man acquires a share of this learning, not all at once, but a little at a time, according to the mode of his nature; and everyone who learns thus must needs believe, in order that he may acquire science in a perfect degree" ( II, IIae, 2, 3) .

The analogy between faith and reason and between their respective "objects" --supernatural or revealed truths and truths naturally accessible to us-- literally underpins Aquinas's notion of faith . [ Unsurprisingly, since the symbola fidei were mistakenly taken for catalogs of truths to be assented to in faith, for factual statements rather than for what they are: confessions of faith. Hence, persuaded of the truth of the Christian faith, and convinced that truth and falsity apply only to statements, Aquinas

could easily fall within the gravitational pull of the Aristotelian epistemology, which sees judgments and the statements in which judgments are expressed as the only acts susceptible of truth and falsity. See Aquinas’s own commentary on De interpretatione) ]. This is why--to give a couple of examples--he sees a perfect continuity and complementarity between the "doctrine revealed by God" and "the philosophical disciplines investigated by human reason." This is why, too, his main concern, when he deals with the act of faith, is to situate faith in relation to such other cognitional acts as opining, doubting, suspecting, and knowing, all of which belong within the epistemic order, rather than to other acts which are not purely cognitional, such as loving, or entrusting oneself into somebody's hands, as Christ did on the cross.

God as the formal object of faith

Let us return to our quarry --the object of faith as understood by Aquinas. Aquinas's Christian tradition makes him clearly aware that the term of the faith-relationship is God himself. Faith is faith in God , whatever else the relationship may involve. That awareness was in fact what, concerning the act of faith, led him to declare, as we saw in the last chapter, that the assent to what God reveals is only secondary, while the trust in God is the principal. Correlatively, then, concerning the object of faith, he also has to introduce some sort of distinction between what is principal and what is secondary. And so he does. However,  there has to be correspondence between the way in which he conceives the act of faith and the way in which he conceives the object of the act of faith. Now, given that his analysis of the act of faith practically bypassed what he nevertheless called "the principal," that is, the trust in the God who reveals, and placed all the emphasis on the assent to the truths revealed by God, unsurprisingly the correlative distinction concerning the object of faith will displace the focus from God Himself to the truths revealed by God. Indeed, the "principal" in the "object" of faith, as we will see, is not God Himself, as it was for the Fathers, but rather   certain of the truths revealed by God .

Saying that the object of faith is the First Truth, however correct that may be, is insufficient. For the fact is, as Aquinas well realizes, that Christians believe--that is, adhere or assent through faith to--many things. In fact, they adhere through faith, at least implicitly, to as many things as are contained in the Holy Scripture, for "Holy Scripture is the rule of faith, to which no addition of subtraction can lawfully be made" ( II, IIae, l, 9, obj. l; 1070) . Accordingly, the Christian "is prepared to believe whatever is contained in the Holy Scripture ( II, IIae, 2, 5; 1081 ). Now, all these are truths of faith. How can this multiplicity of truths cohere with the fact thst faith is fkaith in God? Aquinas answers by distinguishing between the material and the formal object of faith:

"The  object of every cognitive habit includes two things: first, that which is known materially, and is the material object, so to speak; and, secondly, that whereby it is known, which is the formal aspect of the object...

"Accordingly, if in faith we consider the formal aspect of the object, it is nothing else than the First Truth. For the faith of which we are speaking does not assent to anything, except because it is revealed by God. If, however, we consider the things to which faith assents, they include not only God, but also many other things, which, nevertheless, do not come under the assent of faith except as bearing some relation to God..." (II, IIae, 1, 1; 1056).

It might seem that under the names of the "formal" and the "material" object of faith Aquinas is just distinguishing "the principal," which is God, and "the secondary," which are the truths revealed by God. For the distinction is between the truths revealed by God and assented to by the believer, on the one hand, and the motive for the assent given to them, on the other, which is God's veracity. The truths believed are multiple, but the motive is one and the same, namely, the fact that they are revealed, that is, supported by the infallible authority of the First Truth.

Had Aquinas stopped at this point, the way in which he conceives the object of faith could, perhaps, still be identified with the traditional understanding of the term of the faith-relationship. Unfortunately, the gravitational pull of the Aristotelian epistemology by which he has been captured forces Aquinas to alter significantly the idea of the formal object of faith he just presented.

A different idea of the formal object of faith: the unseen truths

In  reply to an objection Aquinas introduces a further distinction regarding the formal object of faith:

"The formal aspect of the object of faith can be taken in two ways: first, on the part of the thing believed, and thus there is one formal aspect of all matters of faith, viz. the First Truth; and from this point of view there is no distinction of articles. Secondly, the formal aspect of a matter of faith can be considered from our point of view, and thus the formal aspect of a matter of faith is that it is something unseen; and from this point of view there are various distinct articles of faith..." ( II, IIae, 1, 6, ad 2 ).

The distinction between the formal object of faith "on the part of the thing believed," on the one hand, and "from our point of view," on the other, seems innocent enough. And it would, indeed, be innocent if the truths the truths that are assented to by the believer because they are revealed by the First Truth were were coextensive with the truths that are "unseen," for in that case there would be one and the same formal object considered from two points of view. But if that is not the case, then what Aquinas has done by means of this distinction is to shift to a different idea of the formal object of faith from the one he had previously presented. And this, I think, is what has happened here. For in the first view presented by Aquinas the formal object covers all the truths that are object of faith, since each and all of them are revealed by the First Truth and are to be assented to by the believer for that very reason, while in the second view the formal object covers only those revealed truths which are "unseen," that is, which are not themselves evident and cannot be rationally demonstrated. Thus Aquinas's distinction between the formal object of faith "on the part of the thing believed" and "from our point of view" does not refer to one and the same formal object; it introduces a different formal object of faith. And it is by means of this second conception of the object of faith as that which is usnseen that Aquinas will clearly identify Gods-the-object-of faith with truths to be assented to. Indeed, from now on, as we will presently see, the First Truth as the object of faith,  which Aquinas had designated as the principal, will disappear; what will remain is a distinction within the "the secondary," that is, among  the truths revealed, some of which will now become the principal, while some will be the secondary object of faith..

The essential and the secondary object of faith

There is a hierarchy among the truths revealed by God. Let us have Aquinas speak for  himself on this important point:

"Some things proposed to our belief are in themselves of faith , while others are of faith, not in themselves, but only in relation to others ... Now, since the chief object of faith consists in those things which we hope to see in heaven..., it follows that those things are in themselves of faith which order us directly to eternal life. Such are the Trinity of Persons in Almighty God, the mystery of Christ's Incarnation, and the like; and these are distinct articles of faith. On the other hand, certain things in Holy Scripture are proposed to our belief, not chiefly on their own account, but for the manifestation of those mentioned above, e. g. , that Abraham had two sons, that a dead man rose again at the touch of Eliseus' bones', and the like, which are related in Holy Scripture for the purpose of manifesting the divine majesty or the Incarnation of Christ; and such things should not form distinct articles" ( II, IIae, 1, 6, ad 1; 1064). (My emphasis).

The same is repeated in slightly different words two articles later:

"As was stated above, to faith those things belong essentially , the sight of which we shall enjoy in eternal life, and by which we are brought to eternal life. Now two things are proposed to us to be seen in eternal life, viz., the secret of the Godhead, to see which is to possess happiness, and the mystery of Christ's Incarnation ... (II, IIae, 1, 8; 1068).

And again:

"We must, therefore, say that t he direct object of faith is that whereby man is made one of the Blessed, as was stated above, while the indirect and secondary object comprises all things delivered by God to us in Holy Scripture, for instance, that Abraham had two sons, that David was the son of Jesse, and so forth . Therefore, as regards the primary points or articles of faith, man must believe them explicitly, just as he must have faith; but as to other points of faith, man is not bound to believe them explicitly, but only implicitly, or to be ready to believe them, in so far as he is prepared to believe whatever is contained in the divine Scriptures. Then alone is he bound to believe such things explicitly, when it is clear to him that they are contained in the doctrine of faith" ( II, IIae, 2, 5; 1081 ).(My emphasis).

Finally, a text in which Aquinas explicitly connects his second, more restrained conception of the formal object of faith, with the truths that are of faith absolutely :

"Nevertheless, that which is proposed to be believed equally by all is equally unknown by all as an object of science. Such are the things which are of faith absolutely . Consequently, faith and science are not about the same things " (II, IIae, 1, 5; 1062) .

It is only natural to ask what prompts Aquinas to introduce this hierarchy among the truths revealed by God, given that, as he 0himself repeatedly points out, all the truths revealed by the First Truth, from the greatest to the smallest, from the secret of the Godhead to the fact that David was Jesee's son, commit God's veracity equally and are, therefore, to be believed equally by the faithful. The basic reason for this, I surmise, is the weight of the Christian tradition as reflected in the Symbola, the tradition on which Aquinas depends and to which he has the firm intention of remaining loyal. As remarked in the previous chapter, the traditional notion of faith does not primarily concentrate on the truths revealed by God but on God Himself as the term of the faith-relationship. However, forced by his intellectualistic, epistemic conception of faith, Aquinas's focus has shifted from God to the (FACTUAL) truths revealed by God . It is, therefore, among these truths that he has to find a privileged place for God as the central object of faith, in order to satisfy himself as to the continuity of his views with the tradition. That is what he does by designating certain revealed truths "concerning God" ( II, IIae, 1, 6; 1063) as the direct or essential object of faith and relegating the others to a secondary place.

That this is the main reason for the hierarchy Aquinas establishes among the truths of faith is suggested by the fact that he repeatedly identifies the truths that constitute "what is of faith absolutely" with the articles of the Creed that deal with God. This identification is not casual, for the Fathers themselves had insisted that the Christian faith finds its natural and sanctioned expression in the official confessions of faith, in which God clearly appears as the term of faith-relationship and which typically reserve to God the solecistic construction that expresses the faith-relationship: "Credo in unum Deum , Patrem omnipotentem... et in unum Dominum Iesum Christum ... et in Spiritum Sanctum Dominum et vivificantem..." In fact, Aquinas is so keen in maintaining his continuity with the tradition that, precisely in connection with the symbols of faith, he specifically excludes even the Church from being part of the direct object of faith, as the Fathers had also done:

"If we say ' In' the holy Catholic Church , this must be taken as verified in so far as our faith is directed to the Holy Ghost, Who sanctifies the Church; so that the sense is: I believe in the Holy Ghost sanctifying the Church . But it is better and more in keeping with the common use to omit the in , and say simply, the holy Catholic Church, as Pope Leo observes" ( II, IIae, 1, 10, ad 5; l071-1072 ).

What Aquinas fails to notice is that his distinction between the direct and the secondary object of faith does not coincide at all with the traditional understanding of the object of faith, which is God Himself. For his distinction concerning the object of faith is not between God Himself and the truths revealed by Him, but rather between certain of "the things proposed to our belief," which are "essential, namely, the truths about God contained in the Creed,” and certain other revealed truths which are "secondary," “like the fact that somebody resuscitated at the touch of Eliseus's bones' or that Abraham had two sons.” This difference, I maintain,  corresponds to two entirely different views of the faith-relationship, as it will now be explained.

Belief in God Almighty, or belief that God is Almighty?

The displacement of the principal in the object of faith from God Himself to certain of the truths revealed that are directly about God does not go without problems. For if faith is reduced to assenting to certain truths, event if the truths are about God rather than about other matters only indirectly related to God, one can hardly see that how God can be “the principal” in faith.

No doubt, Aquinas sensed that his idea of the object of faith involved this danger, for he himself raises the question "whether the object of faith is a proposition?" (II, IIae, 1, 2 ) and objects to himself that believing in God is very different from believing statements about God. The objection, as voiced by Aquinas, is the following:  

" The exposition of faith is contained in the symbol. Now the symbol does not contain propositions, but things; for it is not stated therein that God is almighty, but: I believe in God... almighty . Therefore the object of faith is not a proposition but a thing" ( II, IIae, 1, 2, obj. 2).

Aquinas's answer is two-pronged. One of the spikes of his fork deals with the propositional form , the other with the substance of what is believed. In regard to the propositional form, he argues that the nature of the intellect is such that we know whatever we know by "composition and division," that is, by affirmative or negative judgments through which we attribute ("composition") or refuse to attribute ("division") a certain property to a subject, which is what propositions express . Thus, yes, the expression of the judgment by which the intellect assents to a truth of faith has to take the grammatical form of an affirmative proposition, for such is the nature of the human intellect. [HE SHOULD HAVE DISTINGUISHED BETWEEN THE SITUATED AGENT’S PRACTICAL JUDGMENTS INVOLVED IN DECISIONS, WHICH REFER TO OBJECT FOR RESPONSE AND ARE MEANT APPLICATIVELY, AND THE THE REFLECTIVE JUDGMENTS THAT ARE NOT DIRECTLY CONNECTED WITH DECISION]. However, in regard to the substance, that is, to what is actually believed or assented to, Aquinas remarks that the assent of faith does not terminate in the proposition itself but in "the thing," that is, the reality meant by the proposition. Now, though "the thing" believed--is in itself simple, our mode of knowing it is complex, for it predicates or refuses to predicate something of a subject. (II, IIae, 1, 2) . [THIS DOESN’T ANSWER THE QUESTION, FOR THE QUESTION IS WHETHER THE REALITY KNOWN IS “FACTUAL”, THAT IS, PURELY OBJECTIVE FACT TO BE ASSENTED TO, OR RATHER “OBJECT FOR RESPONSE,” TERM OF AN ON-GOING, LIVING, PERSONAL RELATIONSHIP].

Has Aquinas solved the problem? Only apparently, I think, and only because he himself raises the objection in a form that suggests that what creates the problem is the wrongheaded idea nobody has that the assent involved in a judgment and expressed in a proposition is assent to the proposition itself rather than to the reality judged by the judgment and meant by the proposition. Given this, Aquinas has a very easy way out of the problem by explaining that, although the 'knowledge' of faith is propositional, it really is assent to God, to whom the propositions of the Symbol refer, not to the propositions themselves. But this answer misses completely the substance of the objection, which is that the term of the faith-relationship is of an entirely different kind from that of the objects of knowledge as Aristotle conceived them and of which Aquinas is speaking .

Actually, the objection expresses one of the most serious misgivings of all those anti-Aristotelians and non-Aristotelians who doubted that the Aristotelian intellectualist conception of knowledge could accommodate the faith-relationship without denaturing it. For the Aristotelian epistemic framework within which Aquinas has placed the act of faith, is apt, by the very nature of the purely epistemic interests by which Aristotle was guided, only to fit objects of knowledge-assent,* but God, who is the term of the faith-relationship, is not, and cannot be reduced to, an object of knowledge, to a "knowable object," to a reality or an existent being in the Aristotelian sense, to an epistaton. [ THE FEUERBACHIAN DISTINCTION BETWEEN “OBJEKT” AND “GEGESTAND,” WHICH NEATLY SEPARATES OBJECT OF AFFECTION FROM OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE AND ATTRITUBES OBJECTIVITY ONLY TO THE LATTER, MAY HELP TO EXPLAIN THIS POINT. (Cf. Delhougne, pp. 536-537, and see my “99-nov-1" on Barth et la connaissance de Dieu, pp. 1 and 2) ]. This is why the Nicaean Creed, which genuinely expresses the Christian faith, God doesn’t figure, even grammatically, as direct object of the its “articles of faith,” for the direct object is constituted by “facts.” Indeed, the Christian confession of faith, the Christian "I believe," has not as its term or correlate a series of propositions about God-- that God exists, that God is almighty, etc. Calvin was not wrong when he reminded us in his Institutiones , that the Christian faith does not consist primarily in believing that God is almighty, but in believing in God almighty. [This is what Aquinas tried to capture, but failed, in his distinction between believing in propositions and in the things to which the propositions refer]. And, correlatively, the act of faith does not consist in assenting to the fact that God is almighty, but in a practical, personal rather than purely intellectual commitment of the Christian to God almighty. Consequently, even if we grant Aquinas that the proposition "God is Almighty" refers to a reality (to a "thing"), and that what is assented to is "the thing" rather than the proposition, the fact remains that his answer does not meet the objection, much less does it solve it. And since the objection is that his iuntellectualistic, epistemic notion of faith does not do justice to the Christian faith, it seems to put in the right all those "anti-Aristotelians" and reluctant "non-Aristotelians" who considered impossible the marriage between their Christian faith and Aristotelian reason.  

In any case, the issue of "believing that God ..." and "believing in God " will reappear in the next chapter. Then we will have a further opportunity to reconsider whether what I just said distorts or misinterprets Aquinas's views. For the moment, let us explore other serious problems that attend his treatment of the object of faith, due to the tension between the demands of his Aristotelian epistemology and the demands of his faith.

Between faith with vision and faith without vision

The tension I am referring to is located on the line at which reason and faith touch each other, and the tremors are felt by Aquinas precisely in connection with those truths of faith which are also accessible to reason or, what is the same, in connection with those truths which are both object of faith because they are revealed and object of knowledge because they are rationally demonstrable.   The tension, as we shall presently see, is such that it constrains Aquinas to waver between two incompatible positions,  which is in itself significant.

Position # 1 : No truth which is object of faith can be rationally demonstrated .

Inquiring “whether the object of faith can be something seen,” Aquinas replies by distinguishing the assent involved in faith, which rests on God’s authority, from the assent involved in knowledge on the basis that only the latter is prompted by evidence. From this he draws the following conclusion:

"Now those things are said to be seen which, of themselves, move the intellect or the senses to knowledge of them. Therefore it is evident that neither faith nor opinion can be of things seen either by the senses or by the intellect" (II, IIae, 1, 4; 1060) .

The denial that what is object of faith can be rationally demonstrated is categorical, unconditional, because it necessarily follows from the very way in which Aquinas conceives and defines the act of faith. Indeed, if what essentially distinguishes believing from knowing is the absence of compelling evidence in the case of believing, then necessarily, by definition, that is, without any possible exception , what is object of faith cannot be object of knowledge, and what is object of knowledge cannot be object of faith. In other words, if a truth can be rationally demonstrated, it cannot be a truth of faith, for it is impossible to "believe" and "know" the same object, since knowledge includes vision and faith excludes it. One can believe something because one does not know that it is true. But if one knows that it is true, one cannot believe it. This is what I call position # 1.

By the way, this is the position that authorizes those who think that Aquinas reached a perfectly harmonious synthesis between faith and reason that in a previous chapter I presented as possibly being Aquinas's view. Indeed, what we have in this case is a relationship between reason and faith in which they complete each other without in any way interfering with each other, so that there is no possibility at all of conflict between them -–not even apparent conflict, since they have different objects. According to this view, faith and reason touch each other in matters related to religion, but they do not interfere with each other, because in these matters there are two different kinds of truths: on the one hand, truths which exceed the possibilities of reason left to itself, which are revealed by God, and which are object of faith ; on the other hand, truths which are accessible to reason left to itself, which are not revealed by God, and which are object of knowledge . In this case, the synthesis between faith and reason is perfectly harmonious, for each of them has its proper, self-conained, and well-defined sphere within which each is autonomous.    However, as we will see in a moment, Aquinas also holds a very different view concerning the demonstrability of the truths which are object of faith, which of course implies a different view of the relationship between faith and reason. That is what prevented me from claiming that Aquinas achieved a real synthesis between faith and reason, as his sanguine admirers claim he did.

The advantage of position # 1 is that it is fully consistent with THE ARISTOTELIAN EPISTEMIC FRAMEWORK WITHIN WHICH AQUINAS HAS PLACED THE ACT OF FAITH AS DISTINCT FROM OTHER ACTS OF THE INTELLECT. Unfortunately, it has the enormous disadvantage of failing to square with the data of the Christian faith. For it reduces the object of faith to those truths which are inaccessible to human reason left to its own strength, thereby excluding from the Christian faith such basic truths as, for instance, God's existence, which Aquinas deems to be rationally demonstrable. That, precisely, is the problem that constrained Aquinas to shift to what I call position # 2.

Before considering this second position, let us reflect on Aquinas's quandary. If he sticks by solution # 1, he saves his Aristotelian notion of faith AS AN INTELLECTUAL ACT OF ASSENT, but he detracts from the object of his faith. However, if in order to save the integrity of the object of his faith he grants that certain truths which are object of faith can be demonstrated, as he will actually do by adopting position # 2, he is bound to give up his notion of the act of faith, for according to it what is believed cannot possibly be known, and what is known cannot possibly be believed. Yet, Aquinas will adopt solution # 2 without renouncing his notion of the act of faith as assent. Is that feasible? If so, at what price?

Position # 2 : Certain truths which are object of faith can be rationally demonstrated .

In the second question of the Summa Aquinas maintains that God's existence can be demonstrated. Actually, he proposes no less than "five ways" of demonstrating it (I, 2, 3; 21-22) . This, however, forces him to confront the following objection:

"It seems that the existence of God cannot be demonstrated. For it is an article of faith that God exists. But what is of faith cannot be demonstrated, because a demonstration produces scientific knowledge, whereas faith is of the unseen..." ( I, 2, 2, obj. 1; p. 20).

Aquinas replies:

"The existence of God and other like truths about God, which can be known by natural reason, are not articles of faith, but are preambles to the articles ; for faith presupposes natural knowledge , even as grace presupposes nature and perfection the perfectible. Nevertheless, there is nothing to prevent a man, who cannot grasp a proof, from accepting, as a matter of faith, something which in itself is capable of being scientifically known and demonstrated" ( Ibid ., ad 1 ).

We should remark that what Aquinas denies is that

the existence of God and other like truths about God are articles of faith, not that they are object of faith. This corresponds, of course, to the way the objection is raised by Aquinas himself, where it is argued that those truths are "articles of faith." Now, what Aquinas means by "articles of faith" are the truths concerning God that are contained in the " symbola fidei ." However, as repeatedly acknowledged by Aquinas himself, the symbola fidei do not contain all the truths that are object of faith, for Holy Scripture contains many truths that are of faith which are not to be found in the Symbola fidei and are nonetheless part of the material object of faith, such as that Abraham had two sons and that David was the son of Jesse.

If Aquinas were denying that the existence of God and other like truths--"the preambles to the articles"--are object of faith, he would still be sticking to position # 1. But he is not. For he is implicitly conceding that "the preambles" can --and, indeed, need to-- be "accepted as a matter of faith" by a person "who cannot grasp a proof," though they are "something which in itself is Susceptible of being scientifically known and demonstrated." Thus, Aquinas has already abandoned his previous stand which reduced the object of faith to those revealed truths that cannot be known. For he had previously  asserted, as a necessary and unconditional conclusion based on the nature of the act of faith, that what is object of knowledge cannot be object of faith, whereas now he is asserting that it can, provided that the person who believes be not the same as the person who knows.

In any case, even if the text I have been commenting upon were ambiguous enough to authorize the view that Aquinas does not think that "the preambles" are object of faith (as all those who sing the praises of Aquinas's perfectly harmonious synthesis between faith and reason would have to argue), the texts we will consider now clearly show the contrary.   

Precisely in answer to the question "whether it is necessary to believe those things which can be proved by natural reason?" Aquinas writes:

" I answer that , It is necessary for man to receive by faith not only things which are above reason, but also those known by reason; and this for three motives. First, in order that man may arrive more quickly at the knowledge of divine truth. For the science to whose province it belongs to prove the existence of God and many other such truths is the last of all to offer itself to human inquiry, since it presupposes many other sciences; so that it would be far along in life that man would arrive at the knowledge of God. The second reason is, in order that the knowledge of God may be more widespread. For many are unable to make progress in the study of science...; and all these persons would be altogether deprived of the knowledge of God, unless divine things were brought to their knowledge by way of faith. The third reason is for the sake of certitude. For human reason is very deficient in things concerning God. A sign of this is that philosophers, in their inquiry of human affairs by human investigation, have fallen into many errors, and have disagreed among themselves . [THIS INVOLVES AN IMPLICIT RECOGNITION THAT THE TRUTHS OF FAITH ARE OBJECTS OF KNOWLEDGE, EPISTATA , THOUGH NOT ALL OF THEM ARE ACCESSIBLE TO REASON LEFT TO ITS OWN DEVICES, FOR THAT IS WHAT PHILOSOPHERS ARE ABOUT]. And consequently, in order that men might have knowledge of God, free of doubt and uncertainty, it was necessary for divine truths to be delivered to them by way of faith, being told by God Himself, Who cannot lie" ( II, IIae, 2, 4; 1079 ). (My translation)

This text, I think, is unambiguous. Now, if the ambiguous passages in an author's work are to be understood in the light of the unambiguous ones, then the text on which I commented immediately before this one has to be understood in the same sense as this one. And what this one affirms is that "it is necessary for man to receive by faith not only things which are above reason, but also those known by reason," among which the "preambles" are obviously to be counted.  

In this way, Aquinas has restored its full; extension to the object of faith, which position # 1 necessarily reduced to those revealed truths which exceed human reason left to its own strength. Indeed, position # 2 extends the quality of object of faith to all the truths revealed by God, whether or not they are rationally demonstrable . In addition, position # 2 seems to satisfy the requirements of his Aristotelian notion of the act of faith, which

--this is new, too-- only demands that the same truth be not object of faith and of belief for the same person :

"... it is impossible that one and the same thing should be believed and seen by the same person. Hence it is equally impossible for one and the same thing to be an object of science and of belief for the same person" (II, IIae, 1. 5).

It was, therefore, in accordance with this new position that, concerning "the preambles," Aquinas pointed out in the previous text that the same truth can be object of faith for the Christian capable of grasping a proof for God's existence and object of belief for the Christian incapable of such grasp. The former knows that God exists; for the latter it is a matter of faith .

But is this second position more satisfactory than the first? Hardly so. For it implies that the object of faith is not constituted as such by the fact that it is revealed by God--which is the way in which Aquinas himself defined the material object of faith--but by the comparative intellectual ability of people. For there are truths revealed by God that are not object of faith for the more intelligent Christians because they know them. By the same token, it also implies that the object of faith is not the same for all Christians, depending on their intelligence, so that what is part of the faith of the less intelligent Christians is not part of the faith of the more intelligent ones.

The only semblance of a solution furnished by Aquinas is that  " that which is proposed to be believed equally by all is equally unknown by all as an object of science. Such are the things which are of faith absolutely. Consequently, faith and science are not about the same things" (IIa, IIae, 1, 5; 1062).

However, it is clear that this passage corresponds to position # 1, where faith and science are not about the same things” and only those “things which are of faith absolutely” and constitute the formal object of faith “from our point of view” are really object of faith rather than of knowledge. But position # 2 affirms that “it is necessary... to receive by faith not only things which are above reason, but also those known by reason” (II, IIae, 2, 4; 1079). And it is precisely about the latter that the problem arises, for they are object of faith only for the less intelligent, with the unavoidable result that the object of the Christian faith is different for different Christians depending on their intelligence. Thus, the proposed solution is no solution.

The above problems regard the object of faith. Even on the subject’s side, however, that is, even on the believer’s side, position # 2 has a corresponding serious drawback. Indeed, as realized by Aquinas, if the more intelligent Christians cannot accept by faith what they know, then the merit of their faith is less than that of the less intelligent. For evidence compels assent and leaves no room for the prompting of the intellect by the will moved by God’s grace to accept what is revealed, in which the merit resides. Considering this obvious objection, Aquinas replies:

“Now human reasons in support of what we believe may stand in a twofold relation to the will of the believer. First, as preceding the act of the will, as, for instance, when a man either has not the will, or not a prompt will, to believe, unless he be moved by human reasons; and in this way human reasoning diminishes the merit of faith... Secondly, human reasons may be consequent to the will of the believer. For when a man has a will ready to believe, he loves the truth he believes, he thinks out and takes to heart whatsoever reasons he can find in support thereof; and in this way, human reasoning does not exclude the merit of faith...” (II, IIae, 2, 10).

This reply comes in answer to the question “whether reasons in support of what we believe lessen the merit of faith?” Evidently, Aquinas denies that such is necessarily the case. But as to the reason for that answer, the passage strikes me as highly ambiguous.

One way in which the passage can be understood is that it is possible for a Christian to believe and to know the same truth, provided that the Christian believe it before knowing it by way of

evidence, for this manifests the person’s will to believe it even if it were undemonstrable. However, this interpretation in terms of temporal priority seems unpromising, for then the person who converted to the Christian faith after having known God’s existence through one of Aquinas’s five ways would be at a disadvantage in terms of merit of faith, which is what Aquinas is trying to protect here. Perhaps, then, the passage is to be understood, not in terms of temporal priority, but of the ultimately determinant reason for the person’s assent. If the person assented because the particular truth is demonstrated, and would not be willing to believe it if it were not demonstrated, then there is no room for the merit of faith. But if t he person would be willing to believe that truth because it is revealed, even if it were undemonstrable, then the merit is preserved.

Both of these interpretations would extricate Aquinas from the problem he is facing. But in both cases he would be foreced to sacrifice his Aristotelian, epistemic notion of faith, which makes it absolutely impossible for the same person to believe and know the same object, as would have to be the case in either of the previous interpretations. However, since Aquinas did not feel constrained to give up his view of the act of faith as intellectual asdsent, the only acceptable interpretation of the passage seems to be the following: When a Christian knows something, then that Christian cannot anymore accept it by faith, for faith and knowledge are mutually exclusive in the same person. Nonetheless, the merit of faith is not diminished if the determinant reason for the assent is not the evidence of the truth, so that the person would believe it even if it were undemonstrable.

That this wis what Aquinas actually meant is confirmed by ther way in which he answers an objection raised in the same article:

“... though demonstrative reasons in support of the preambles of faith, but not of the articles of faith, diminish the measure of faith, since they make the thing believed to be seen; yet they do not diminish the measure of charity, which makes the will ready to believe them even if they were unseen. And so the merit is not diminished” (II, IIae, 2, 10, ad 2; 1090).

Now, if this solution renders back to the more intelligent Christians the merit that they seemed to have lost, it sends Aquinas right back onto the other horn of the dilemma that concerns the object of faith, for now the object of faith for the less intelligent is different and more reduced in extension from the object of faith of the more intelligent, given that the more intelligent do not have to accept by faith certain of the truths revealed by God. To use Aquinas’s own expression, the measure of faith of the more intelligent is diminished by comparison to that of the less intelligent.

In this way, Aquinas may have saved his Aristotelian conception of the act of faith, but at the price of a very dubious continuity with the way in which faith has been understood in the Christian tradition. For not only has he displaced the term or correlate of faith from God to truths about God, but he has ended up affirming, by implication, that certain of the truths revealed by God are not  object of faith, at least not for the more intelligent of the faithful.

Needless to say, unless I have misunderstood Aquinas completely, this chapter shows that the idea that he achieved a real synthesis between faith and reason is highly problematic. For, if we identify Aquinas with position # 1, then there is no possible conflict at all between reason and faith, but in that case the object of faith is reduced to those revealed truths which exceed human reason. An if we identify Aquinas with position # 2, then  what determines what is to be accepted by faith is not that it is revealed by God but the measure of intelligence of different Christians.

It is too early, however, to hazard firm conclusions as to whether Aquinas conception of faith coheres with the Christian experience and with the traditional understanding and, consequently, whether his synthesis of faith and reason is or is not valid. Let us reserve such conclusions for the time when all the data are in. For we still have to explore Aquinas’s position concerning the nature of theology, which may throw additional light on this subject.
