---
title: "2004-march-Nussbaum on practical knowledge-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/2004/2004-march-Nussbaum on practical knowledge-1.wpd"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v2.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

2004-march–Nussbaum on practical knowledge March 26, 2004

      NUSSBAUM ON PRACTICAL KNOWLEDGE IN ARISTOTLE

In The Fragility of Goodness (1986) and in Love’s Knowledge (1990), Martha Nussbaum attributes to Aristotle a very different conception of practical knowledge from the one attributed to him by Daniel Devereux. The differences between the two conceptions are such that one finds it very difficult to believe that the two attributions can be correct. The reason is that neither Devereux nor Nussbaum give any indication that they are aware that from other Aristotelian texts than the ones each of them takes into consideration, belonging perhaps to different moments of the evolution of Aristotle’s thought, emerges a very different conception of practical knowledge. If the case happened to be such, however, then the respective attributions to Aristotle by Devereux and Nussbaum would both be equally justified. Nonetheless, the two notions of practical knowledge are not only different from each other, but so significantly different as to be incompatible as interpretations of, supposedly, the same epistemic reality, namely, practical knowledge as conceived by Aristotle. In other words, the two notions of practical knowledge presented by Devereux and Nussbaum, however Aristotelian both may be, cannot both be correct. In which case we shall have to determine which of the two, if either, is the correct one.

In order to make sense of the differences between the two conceptions of practical knowledge attributed to Aristotle by Devereux and Nussbaum, respectively, I must begin by stating my conviction that they are ultimately determined by a different view of what Aristotle is about as a philosopher. Now , Devereux feels no need to specify his view of what Aristotle is doing in his philosophical works because he takes that for granted, as he assumes that everybody does. Well, not only does Nussbaum not take for granted that Aristotle is doing in his philosophical works what Devereux and most philosophers assume matter-of- factly that Aristotle is doing, but she will specify a different view of what Aristotle is actually doing. Unfortunately, Nussbaum is so sure that Aristotle is always consistent with the view of the philosophical task she attributes to him that she dos not take the time to explore whether in certain cases, and concerning in particular practical knowledge, Aristotle might not be doing the kind of thing Devereux and many other people attribute to him.

In 1982 Martha Craven Nussbaum published a seminal paper entitled “Saving Aristotle’s Appearances.” I call it seminal because it defined her own future philosophical direction, as well as her relationship to Aristotle. While Aristotle is for many other philosophers just a historical figure, however important, for Nussbaum he is a living philosopher whose views, once purified from the dust deposited on them by centuries of interpretation, remain as relevant to the contemporary philosophical undertaking as if they had been introduced yesterday

morning. At any rate, they are intensely relevant to Nussbaum, and her brilliant philosophical career has shown how and why.

Practical knowledge according to Nussbaum

Let me start again.  Nussbaum’s reading of Aristotle is predicated on an  interpretation of Aristotle’s entire philosophical project that is different from the traditional one, consecrated by the medieval Scholastics and their successors, and implicitly shared by Devereux. According to the traditional view, taken for granted by Devereux, the philosophical project consists in the attempt to reach the truth behind or beyond the appearances, the reality in itself behind the package in which it initially presents itself to us, or – to use one of Nussbaum’s own expressions– the “true nature that ‘loves to hide itself’ (Heraclitus, B123) beneath our human ways of speaking and believing.” ^(F1). In short, philosophers, in the traditional interpretation, attempt to reach the reality behind the appearances. ^(F2) Clearly, Kant, for one, took for granted that the philosophical project had traditionally been understood in this way, however despondent he himself may have been of the possibility of success in such an enterprise. But that, according to Nussbaum, who in this regard is inspired by Owen, ^(F3) is not how Aristotle conceives his own philosophical project, nor what he himself actually does. Aristotle does not attempt  to move beyond the appearances, at least not if he follows the method he defines at the beginning of Book VII of the NE just before his discussion of akrasia :

“Here, as in all other cases, we must set down the appearances and, first working through the puzzles, in this way go on to show, if possible, the truth of all the beliefs we hold about these experiences; and , if this is not possible, the truth of the greatest number and the most authoritative. For if the difficulties are resolved and the beliefs left in place, we will have done enough showing.” ^(F4)

Aristotle’s treatment of akrasia in the NE illustrates his philosophical method. Plato had explained akrasia as an intellectual weakness. One does what is wrong because one fails to see that it is wrong, for no one can will to do what he or she sees as wrong. For his part, Aristotle thinks that the Platonic interpretation is at odds with the appearances, that is, with our common beliefs as expressed in the way we speak of akrasia. We think that the akratic person was correctly characterized by the old poet who wrote: “Video meliora, proboque, deteriora sequor,” (I see what is right, and I approve of it, yet I do what is wrong). In short, Plato’s view of akrasia does not respect the appearances.

“Nor is this claim [about the [philosophical method],” continues Nussbaum, concerned with the ethical alone; for an adjacent passage criticises mathematicians on the grounds that they practice their science starting from hypotheses  – from something ‘laid down’ by human beings. They never attain to a pure unhypothetical point, not relative in any way to the conditions and contexts of  of human life and language. Such starting points are alleged to be the only adequate basis for any science” ^(F5)

 

Indeed, “... Aristotle declares that his aim in science and  metaphysics, as well as in ethics , is to save the appearances and their truth...” ^(F6) Thus, at least according to Nussbaum, the maximum possible preservation of the appearances, or at least of the most basic and  important ones, is the goal of the philosophical method as Aristotle sees and practices it in all the areas of his philosophical explorations. On this point Nussbaum disagrees to an extent with Owen, who thought that in certain scientific contexts Aristotle refers by the word “appearances” ( phainomena), not to “our common beliefs,” that is, our descriptions and interpretations of the world, but to uninterpreted data of observation. Indeed, to Nussbaum’s great disappointment,  Owen thinks that the particular case of the empirical sciences is an exception:   

“But Owen did not , I think, go far enough in his criticism of the Baconian picture. He still held on to the view that in certain scientific contests the Baconian translations [of the term ‘ phainomena ’] are appropriate... But Owen is then forced to conclude that  Aristotle uses the term ‘phainomena’ ambiguously. There are two distinct senses -and, I must add, therefore two distinct methods. In one sense, ‘ phainomena ’ means ‘observed data’ and is associated with the Baconian picture of natural science. In the other, it means ‘what we say’ or ‘our common beliefs’, and is associated with a method that aims at sorting out and arranging our descriptions and interpretations of the world. ” ^(F7)  

The appearances are manifested in our language and our practices, and saving the best  appearances amounts to preserving those appearances that cohere  with the greatest number of our practices and our beliefs, with ‘our most common beliefs and sayings” (p. 268). Hence the title of Nussbaum’s article on Aristotle’s philosophical project, to which I am know referring: “Saving Aristotle’s appearances.” ^(F8)   

For her part, Nussbaum protests loudly against this aspect of Owen’s interpretation  which she  in all other points seems to embrace:

“ There is, in fact, no case for crediting Aristotle with anything like the Baconian picture of science based on theory-neutral observation... If we do not insist in introducing an anachronistic scientific conception , the alleged two senses and two methods can be one . When Aristotle sits on the shore of Lesbos taking notes on shellfish, he will be doing something that is not, from his point of view, so far removed from his activity when he records what we say about akrasia . He will be describing the world as it appears to , as it is experienced by, OBSERVERS who are members of our kind... Owen correctly emphasizes that Aristotle is composing these methodological remarks in the shadow of Parmenides, who repudiated together, without distinction, both THE EVIDENCE OF SENSE PERCEPTION AND THE DATA OF SHARED LANGUAGE AND BELIEF, all this he derides as mere ‘convention’ or ’habit’. Aristotle, answering him, promises to work within and to defend a method that is thoroughly committed to THE DATA OF HUMAN EXPERIENCE and accepts these as its limits.” ^(F9)

In the next section of her article, entitled “How the method works,” Nussbaum proceeds to explain in detail, based on Aristotle’s general methodological remarks as well as his actual practice, the three steps that the method comprehends.

(1)  “First the philosopher must ‘set down’ the relevant appearances... in all areas we are to include both a study of ordinary beliefs and sayings and a review of previous scientific or philosophical treatments of the problem, the views of ‘the many and the wise’.” ^(F10)

(2) “The philosopher has now gathered together all the relevant phainomena . His next job, Aristotle argues, is to set out the puzzles and dilemmas with which they confront us. The phainomena present us with a confuse array, often with direct contradictions. They reflect our disagreements and ambivalences. The first step must, therefore, be to bring conflicting opinions to the surface and set them out clearly, marshalling the considerations for and against each side... Without this..., the philosopher is likely to accept too quickly a solution that disguises or merely avoids the problem.” ^(F11)

(3) If philosophy simply preserved the status quo , it would stop here... There are good reasons for p , there are good reasons for not p . The Greek sceptic did stop at this point... Aristotle does not stop here... Our deepest intellectual commitment (as we shall see) is to the Principle of Non-Contradiction, the most basic of all our shared beliefs. The method of appearance-saving therefore demands that we press for consistency . But in resolving our difficulties we are not, Aristotle insists, free to follow a logical argument anywhere it leads. We must, at the end of our work on the puzzles, bring our account back to the phainomena and show that our account does, in fact, preserve them as true – or, at any rate, the greatest number and the most basic. Aristotle repeatedly criticises philosophers and scientists who attend to initial clarity and [LOGICAL] consistency, ignoring this return.” ^(F12)

Nussbaum ends this section with a few general remarks about the principles and procedures that should be used in deciding what appearances to keep and what to throw out, as we press for consistency:

“First, nothing universally believed is entirely discarded. ‘For that which seems to everyone, this we say is’ ( EN 1172a36)... ^(F13) “Second, nothing that we have to be using in order to argue or inquire can get thrown out.” ^(F14)  “Beyond this, we must, Aristotle believes, ask ourselves whether, in the inquiry at hand, we share some conception of the good judge, of the person or persons we will trust to arbitrate our disputes. ... Often our idea of the competent judge is more broadly shared among us, and less subject to disagreement than is our view of the subject-matter... In ethics, for example, we agree more readily about the characteristics of intellect, temper, imagination and experience that a competent judge must have than we do about the particular practical judgments that we expect him to make. The same is true in other areas as well. In Metaphysics IV , Aristotle answers thinkers who create PUZZLES ABOUT PERCEPTION by pointing out that OUR PRACTICES reveal a set of standards for arbitrating disagreements”: ‘It is worthy of amazement if they create a puzzle about whether magnitudes are of such a size, and colors of such quality, as they appear ( phainetai ) to those at a distance or to those who are near.... It is obvious that they do not really think that these are matters for doubt. At any rate nobody, if, while he is in Lybia, he has imagined one night that he is in Athens, wakes up and heads for the Odeion. Again, as for the future, as even Plato says, the opinions of the doctor and the ignorant are not equally authoritative as to whether someone is or is not going to be healthy (l010b3-14).” ^(F15)

FOLLOWS (a) CAUSAL EXPLANATION IN ANALYTICS (279) AND (b) ARIS’S THEORY OF DEFINITION. (280). DON’T BOTH HAVE TO DO WITH HIDDEN NATURES THAT CORRESPOND TO OUR THOUGHTS?   : “Aris develops an account of the transition from our initial use of a natural kind term to its definition. The kind term enters our use on the basis of some communal experience or experiences (the pronoun ‘we’ is used throughout). F.e., ‘We are aware of thunder as a noise in the clouds, of eclipse as a privation of light , or of the human being as a certain species of animal  (93a22-24). At this point we are able to ‘indicate’ ( semainein ) human beings or eclipses, to introduce them into discourse or refer to them; but we do not yet have the scientific definition that states the NATURE of things of this kind..We move from this rough grouping and this thin account to the full definition only when we have some account or theory that states the ‘NATURE’ of the phenomenon; in the case of thunder, he tells us, when we have a theory that tells us that it is the quenching of fire in the clouds, and how this produces the sound we hear. The expert, not the layman, uncovers this theory . In the case of most species of animals, we do not yet, Aris believes, have a theory that satisfies our demands. But our broadly shared belief that natural beings are ‘things that have WITHIN THEMSELVES a principle of change’ ( Ph II I) implies a commitment to abide by the results of scientific investigation into these inner structures . When the scientist comes up with a theory that offers a satisfactory account of the growth and movement of some type of natural being, we are committed to regarding this theory as defining and bounding (at least pro tempore) the [HIDDEN] NATURE of this being – even if some individuals whom we had previously tended to include in the extension of the term will have to be excluded. Our agreement in a commitment to scientific exploration proves more basic than our prima facie disagreement with the biologists over the extension of the term.

Her conciliation of the two irreconcilable trends in Aris’s works

Aris insists that there is no simple tension between the appearances method and the scientist’s aims because our practices and our language embody a reliance on such experts, frequently making their judgments constitutive of truth . This method attempts at once to be RESPECTFUL OF HUMAN LANGUAGE AND ORDINARY WAYS OF BELIEVING and to do justice to the fact that these very practices reveal a demand for scientific understanding . However, the expert is normative for us only to the extent that we agree in accepting his authority (280-281).

(281) AVOWS THAT SHE HAS SAID LITTLE ABOUT HOW HER ACCOUNT OF ARISTOTLE’S SCIENTIFIC/PHILOSOPHICAL METHOD  in the metapahysics I S TO BE PUT TOGETHER WITH THE ACCOUNT OF SCIENTIFIC UNDERSTANDING DEVELOPED IN THE Posterior Analytics – THE IDEAL OF A FINISHED SCIENCE AS A HIERARCHICAL DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM. HER ANSWER : “ But we can PROVISIONALLY  say that the appearance-saving method could be fully compatible with the Analytics ’ demand that, in the natural sciences (as opposed to ethics) the expert should in the end be able to validate his claim to understanding by giving systematic demonstrations of the type described . The two aims would be compatible if the deductive ideal were seen as something that arises, itself, from the appearances, a commitment which we believe ourselves to undertake when we do science. And this, in fact, is how Aris presents his account of episteme there: as an articulation of what ‘we’ believe scientific understanding should be and do. He begins from an account of the conditions under which ‘we’ think we understand something, and goes on to show what this shared conception requires of the scientist. Similarly, the Physics discussion of explanation begins from the ways in which ‘we’ ask and answer ‘Why’?’ questions, and criticises earlier scientists for insufficient attention to the variety of our usage. At every step, Aris is concerned to show how his norm arises out of the appearances and embodies their requirements [p. 281, note20:

It is another problem to relate this norm to the practice of Aris’s scientific treatises, where deductions of this sort are very rarely present... It is plausible to argue, as I do in De Motu Essay 2 , that the evidence uncovered in actual scientific work led Aris to make some revisions in his methodological norms, especially with regard to the autonomy of the sciences . In ethics, on the other hand  he takes pain to argue that our beliefs about practice do not yield the demand for a deductive system. [282, note 21: THERE WILL BE SOME DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE SCIENCE AND ETHICS OF WHICH THERE IS NO EPISTEME. These issues are discussed in my Aris’s De Motu , essay 4. [In note22, some bibliography on the role of nous in the Posterior Analytics] . He is evidently not interested in assimilating the appearances to a theoretical ideal  where the appearances themselves do not reveal a commitment to such an ideal.

But a more troublesome question arises when we consider that the first principles of science in the Analyitics have been thought by centuries of commentators, via the medieval tradition, to be a priori truths grasped by special acts of  intellectual intuition, apart from all  experience. Surely, we might object, the finished structure of an Aristotelian science rests on these, and not, ultimately on the appearances. Or if the scientific works do rest on appearances, they depart, in so placing themselves, from the ideal set forth in the Analytics . ^(F16)

Saving the most authoritative (p. 282 ff).

283, note 24: Burnyeat (“Aris on Understanding and knowledge,” in Aris on Science: The Posterior Analytics, Ed. E. Berti, Padua 1981; and see the account of Aristotelian epagoge in T. Engberg-Pedersen, “More on Aristotelian epagoge”, Phronesis, 24, 1979, 301=319) argues convincingly that episteme is understanding rather than knowledge .

The Analytics tells us how through experience we can gain insight into the fundamental status of the first principles. But only in Metaph IV does Aris defend his first pples against the sceptic who challenges the principle of contradiction. The sceptics demand a demonstration of the pple out of apaideuxia, the education by precept and practice that initiates the young Greek into the ways of his community : “acculturation,” “intellectual habituation,” the sensitive awareness produce by education and experience, or the role this pple plays in all our practices and discourse . Aris attacks this sceptic by showing that he is in fact USING the pple he attacks , for in saying something definite he is ruling out at least the contradictory of what he asserts. If the person does not speak, he ceases to be one of us; if he speaks, he contradicts himself. “ So in a way Aris does not answer the opponents’ challenge. He does not offer him the exterior, Platonic certainty he wants, “ or the cataleptic impression” or perception that certifies its own accuracy (286). “A similar position is implied in the passage we examined earlier, where Aris rejected the Eleatic One on the grounds that not even a lunatic believes in it, IF WE JUDGE FROM HIS ACTIONS. All Aris says is that no human being who undertakes to act in the human world, no human being who does not stand so far outside as not to be ACTING among us all, can be seriously holding this view. Action, even bizarre and abnormal action, commits itself to the existence of movement and plurality . In Metaph IV, 4, 1008b14-19, extends his point to the case in which the opponent, though silent to the argument’s verbal demands , REVEALS THIS COMMITMENT TO THE PRINCIPLE THROUGH HIS PRACTICES: “For why does he go to Megara and not stay put, when he thinks he should go? Why doesn’t he go straight out early in the morning and throw himself into a well.., but instead obviously avoids this, as though he does not actually hold that it is not good and good to fall in? It’s clear then that he believes one thing better and the other thing not better.” The opponent can defeat us only by ceasing to act humanly in our world , as well as by ceasing to speak. As soon as he acts in some fashion, he is being responsive to the definite features of the world as it strikes a human being, namely himself. He is accepting certain appearances, both perceptions and common human beliefs –.. About the badness of early death, about the danger of being killed if  falling into a precipice.... He is allowing the humanity he shares with us to govern his choice . But this reply comes from within human practices. The pple is a priori in the sense of unrevisable, but not outside the lives and practices of human beings . For Plato each science must start from a pple or pples which are ‘unhypotehtical’ or known to hold themselves by themselves, independently of all conceptualisation or thought. For Aris the status of the basic truths on which science si based is a status of necessity for discourse .

290: So Aris “says goodbye to the Platonic forms. They are teretismata (meaningless sounds) that have nothing to do with our speech.  When the Platonist speaks of The Good and The White, he is not referring to anything or communicating anything to us. But to say goodbye to the forms is not to say that they do not EXIST entirely outside of our experience and thought. That we couldn’t say either. Even THE CONTRAST BETWEEN THE WORLD AS IT IS FOR US AND THE WORLD AS IT IS BEHIND OR APART FROM OUR THOUGHT may not be a contrast that the defender of A HUMAN INTERNAL REALISM  should allow himself to make using human language. Here we might say that Aris usually maintains his internality more consistently than Kant, refusing, most of the time, even to try to articulate what it is that we cannot say. ARISTOTELIAN REASON IS COMMITTED TO LANGUAGE AND THOUGHT AND THE LIMITS OF THESE. Appearances and truth are not opposed, as Plato believed. WE CAN HAVE TRUTH ONLY INSIDE THE CIRCLE OF APPEARANCES ,BECAUSE ONLY THERE CAN WE COMMUNICATE, EVEN REFER, AT ALL. 291: This is, then, a kind of realism, neither idealism of any sort nor scepticism. It has no tendency to confine us to internal representations.. It is fully hospitable to truth... It is not relativism, since it insists that truth is one for all thinking, speaking beings. It is a realism, however, that articulates very carefully the limits within which any realism must live. Talk of the eternal or immortal has its place in such realism, but only because such talk is important to our world... The belief in the divinity and eternity of heavenly bodies has weight in philosophy, because it has survived so many changes of social and political belief of a more superficial nature (Metaph. 1074a39). Even the EXISTENCE of an unmoved Mover is established as one of the conclusions of physical science, none of whose pples has a deeper status than the pple of non-contradiction, and many of which are obviously less firmly grounded.               

A few reflections on Nussbaum

- She fails to detect Aris’s ambiguity on the matter of essence an existence . Essence (as well as substance) is connected with explanatory principle (which is always universal) and with cause (which is real in the sense of realistic existing,  i.e. of corresponding to what is in the mind).

- She confuses logical consistency or non-contradiction between statements with practical consistency of the Camusian-Humean kind.

- Her job of showing the compatibility between the Aris of the Metaphysics and the Analytics with the Aris of the De motu animalium and the Ethics is superficial. The latter works have to do with action, not with knowledge . And action understood as Nussbaum understands it as a constitutive of “Perception,” in which action  always takes place in the exposed agent’s present as a response to what is perceived . Not action talked about or known or observed, but action actually carried out by the exposed, vulnerable, desirous agent and from his or her own standpoint. The former works, by contrast, have to do with objectified knowledge, with knowledge as judged and stated. Thus, in her eagerness to canonize Aristotle, she fails to go beyond Aristotle on the basis of the good points she finds in Aristotle.

- She has no hint that the two Aristotelian notions of knowledge –theoretical as correspondence, and practical as appropriate response– are incompatible, and that the former has to be let go. She is right in rejecting what she calls the empiricist or Baconian picture or notion of knowledge. But in her eagerness to absolve Aristotle completely of any contamination with the empiricist picture (only the strictly Baconian would be anachronic), she fails to take seriously the texts that led Devereux and so many others to see in practical knowledge a mixture of knowledge of universal and of particular. From this arises the idea that theoretical knowledge is a precondition for practical knowledge (in order to obey an order I need first to have theoretical knowledge of the order, as Searle claims).  

- I have a feeling that she does not fully realize the tacit indexicality of perception, by which the exposed, situated agent is indicated ,  though at a certain point she speaks of its two aspects.

- She does not exploit, concerning the difference between animals and people, the fact of language, with its double-sided denotation-connotation . For animals the “appearances” are directly connected with action; not so for people, because of their linguistic ‘perception.’ She doesn’t distinguish between the animal’s ‘beliefs’ and the linguistic beliefs of people.  

           - I suspect that Nussbaum’s distinction between two components of practical knowledge

–belief and desire– is invalid, particularly concerning animals because of their lack of language. They are two moments constitutive of action.

- For lack of consideration of the abstraction that enters into theoretical objectified knowledge, she feels entitled to identify the knowledge in the sciences with the agent’s knowledge. “When Aristotle sits on the shore of Lesbos taking notes on shellfish, he will be doing something that is not, if we look at it from his point of view, so far removed from his activity when he records what we say about akrasia . He will be describing the world as it appears to, as it is experienced by, observers who are members of our kind” (p. 274). Owen has more of a point than she thinks, however wrong he may be in other respects, concerning the issue of two (or more) methods of setting the appearances.

April 5, 2004

Owen and Nussbaum

Owen : Aris has  different methods of setting the experienced phenomena in the field of the natural sciences and in other areas of exploration, such as the ethical field. In both cases Aris begins by setting the phainomena, the experienced phainomena. In the natural sciences (astronomy, biology, meteorology) the phainomena that are to be determined before finding the theory that explains them are “empirical observations.” But not in the Physics , where Owen reflects that,” as Mansion observed, in general everything comes down to more or less detailed conceptual analyses –analyses often guided and illustrated by, rather than founded upon, empirical data.’ “ In this sense,” Owen comments, “it would be grossly misleading for Aristotle to claim that he is establishing the principles of his physics upon a survey of the phainomena .” (Owen ‘Tizenai,’ p.114). “But in other contexts similarly concerned with methods of inquiry ‘ phainomena ’ has another sense [than empirical observations]” (ibid.). In his discussion of incontinence [ akrasia ], Aris tells us:

“Here as in other cases we must set down the phainomena and begin by considering the difficulties, and so go on to vindicate if possible all the common conceptions about these states of mind , or at any rate most of them and the most import ant” (EN). ^(F17)     

Ross’s translation of phainomena in this case as “observed facts” misses the point. It is not a matter of the observed facts but of endoxa, the common conceptions, the ‘legomena,”  “matters of linguistic usage or, if you prefer, the conceptual structure revealed by language” (Owen, “Tizenai,”  p. 114). [THE EXPOSED AGENT’S LANGUAGE].

Nussbaum: protests. Aris has only one method in all areas. Moreover, in no case is it a matter of “empirical observations.” This Baconian picture of the Aristotelian method is anachronic. When in Lesbos Aristotle takes notes on shellfish he is setting the phainomena, and the phainomena are of the same kind as when he deals with akrasia . In all cases the initial phainomena are endoxa , and Aris’s purpose is to preserve the majority of the legomena, or at least the most important of them. Moreover, in no case does Aris try to transcend the phainomena toward something hidden [SUCH AS NATURES?]. In this regard there is no difference in Aris’s procedure in the Physics, the Ethics, and the Metaphysics.

Monasterio : The gist of Nussbaum’s reading of Aristotle appears in The Fragility of Goodnesss and in Love’s Knowledge , after his initial excursion into Aristotle’s notion of teleological animal action in her study of the De Motu Animalium . According to Nussbaum, phainomena are initially what phainetai or appears, the appearances. Now phainetai , in Aristotle’s idiolect, is related to phantasia, a word that is usually translated as “imagination,” but whose meaning is very different from that of our modern English  word. Phantasia , in the Aristotelian vocabulary, is the name for the perceptual faculty that finds its actualization in what Nussbaum calls “perception.” What appears, then, in the Aristotelian meaning, is what pahinetai to a particular concrete subject in a particular situation, what is perceived by a particular subject who has phantasia, the capacity to perceive in the Aristotelian sense of perceiving, not in the modern sense of perceiving.  Herein, precisely, lies the difference between Nussbaum’s and Owen’s interpretation of Aristotle’s. Owen thinks that when Aristotle speaks of experiencing (in the case of perceptual experience) he understands perceiving in the modern philosophical sense, that is, as gaining empirical awareness of something , whereas in fact, according to Nussbaum, Aristotle understands it in his sown sense, as gaining the kind of awareness of something that is typical of a subject who has Aristotelian phantasia , which is very different from empirical awareness of something. Empirical awareness of something is awareness of the sensible qualities of an object, for (in the modern view) only the sensible qualities of an object are empirical, that is, capable of being  experienced. But what a creature gifted with phantasia experiences of an object when he or she perceives is totally different from the sensible qualities that appear to a curious observer gifted with senses – for that is what the perceiving subject in the modern sense amounts to.

Nussbaum has analyzed in much detail the experience of the subject gifted with phantasia ,

that is, “the appearances” as understood by Aristotle. Suffice it, for the moment, to say that the experiences of a subject who has phantasia , as Aristotle assumes the human being to have, involves emotions, beliefs and desires, and is intrinsically connected with the (tacitly situated) subject’s responsive action. All of these characteristics are absent in the empirical awareness of object, which is the one of Aristotle at Lesbos when he is collecting observed data as a scientific observer. In other words, emotion, beliefs, and desires are not involved as constituents in the modern notion of experience, which Owen attributes to Aristotle in his scientific works , though he could perhaps with what Nussbaum says of perception that in Aristotle’s ethical treatises. But not with Nussbaum’s idea that the same is the case in all of Aris’s works.

According to Nussbaum, what is perceived by the subject is not something “empirically observed”; it is a question of the subject’s endoxa, of which the subject is not objectively or predicatively aware. The endoxa are subjective in that they involve beliefs* and desires of the subject and are intrinsically connected with the subject’s responsive action. This “experience” is what Nussbaum calls “Perception.”

Nussbaum attributes beliefs not only to people but to animals. However, on this particular point Nussbaum equivocates. Since animals are not linguistic creatures, their beliefs cannot be what we normally call beliefs, which are beliefs-that, beliefs with a specified or at least specifiable “propositional content” and which are not directly connected with action. Here the “beliefs” are exclusively manifested in the animal’s actions, whereas the beliefs of humans can be manifested both in their actions and expressed in their own linguistic statements which have a tacit component not found in the statements of those who observe the agent.  Actually, it is from the animal’s observed action that Nussbaum induces their existence . The same has to be said of the beliefs attributed to people: they are constitutive of the subject’s action, as shown by Aristotle’s own analysis of even the lunatic’s action. This connection of belief with action shows, too, in the case of akrasia, where we induce from the agent’s action that the agent doesn’t really believe what he says he believes and knows about the action’s goodness. Even Nussbaum in one of her analyses of the practical syllogism, insists that the belief here involved cannot be identified with its verbal expression. In other words, the verbal expression of a belief is not constitutive of the human belief in the same sense as the action is constitutive of the belief. If the action is missing, as in the case of akrasia, the belief does not exist, for action is a constitutive moment of the belief, but the akratic person can express linguistically his belief in the goodness of the action without lying, for he believes theoretically but not practically. However, the belief that is constitutive is the practical belief, the belief that necessarily (with conceptual necessity) results in action. Why, then, as Nussbaum says, animals cannot be akratic? Not because they can have no purely theoretical beliefs (which is actually the case), but because they cannot refer themselves to the object connotationally (or ‘conceptually, in a non-Aristotelian sense), but only through desire or fear, as object to be pursued through action or turned away from. That is why the dog reacts to the name of his master by wagging its tail in expectation of its imminent presence, whereas even the child can ask “What about mom?” in response to his or her mother’s name.

My difference with Nussbaum : She has not given up on the very project Aristotle carries out,contrary to his Nussbaumian conception of the appearances, the project of reaching objective natures beyond the appearances, which Nussbaum inconsistently allows for. Owen is right in detecting this project in Aristotle, however inconsistent it may be with the Aristotelian appearances to the exposed agent. And Nussbaum is wrong in failing to detect this inconsistency in Aristotle, and in falling victim to this inconsistency herself in her acceptance of the impossibility of denying existences that transcend the appearances.  

Owen (“Tizenai ta phainomena)

A discrepancy betwen the methods of scientific reasoning recommended in the Analytics and those of the Physics.

But the discrepancy is not as usually characterized: that in the Physics Aris is not deducing from definitions but constructing the definitions. For that is not true either of the Analytics or of the Physics.

The real diferences: (1) In the Physics , by contrast to the Posterior Analytics , Aris does not try to distinguish and keep apart first the process of finding the principles and then of applying them.  (2) But the really important difference concerns the means by which the principles are reached. In the Prior Analytics Aris tells us that “it falls to experience to provide the pples of any subject. .. In astronomy, for instance, it was only when the phainomena  were adequately grasped that the proofs in astronomy were discovered. And the same is true of any science whatever.” Elsewhere he draws the same Baconian picture : the phainomena must be collected as a prelude to finding the theory which explains them. The method is expressly associated with natural science. It seems clear that the phainomena in question are empirical observations . In the natural sciences (astronomy, biology, meteorology) the phainomena are reached thorough empirical observation; in the Physics the phainomena are reached by conceptual analysis guided, but not founded upon, empirical data. Here it is not a mater of “observed facts,” for Aris is not attempting to set the observed facts, but MENTAL ENTITIES, the endoxa (common conceptions), the legomena (matters of linguistic usage or, if you prefer, of the conceptual structure revealed by language. - Same in NE in the case of incontinence, where Aris describes his method as first considering the difficulties and then, as  in (all) other cases, vindicating if possible all the common conceptions, or at least most of them and the most important.   Here Ross’s translation – observed facts – is a mistranslation. It is a matter of endoxa and legomena. The Socratic  view that the incontinent act against their own conviction out of ignorance plainly contradicts the phainomena: not the observed facts but the endoxa, the legomena, “what would commonly be said”. Aris, unlike Socrates,  wants to preserve a sense of doing what is wrong with some knowledge that it is wrong, but not in the full knowledge in the given circumstances. “It is in the same sense that all dialectical argument can be said to start from the phainomena. - Similar ambiguity with the epagoge , which establishes the pples of science by starting from the data of perception (AP. II, 19. 100b3-5; I, 18, 81a38-b9); yet it is said to be one of the met hods of dialectic ( Top. I, 12, 105a10-19) , and as such must begin with the endoxa, what is accepted by most men or by the wise. Similar ambiguity with the aporiai : when the phainomena are empirical data (in biology, meteorology), the aporiai associated with them will tend to be questions of empirical fact or of explanations of such facts, or of squaring a recalcitrant fact with an empirical hypothesis. But in the case of incontinence, the aporiai are things that men are inclined to say. We wouldn’t say that the man of practical wisdom is incontinent (not false, but absurd). Only in the latter sense can the Physics be said to begin with a survey of the phainomena, which in this regard ranks itself not with our physics but with philosophy. Its materials are For the most part not materials of natural history but of dialectic, and the aporiai are not questions of empirical fact but conceptual puzzles.. This is reinforced by the act that in the Physics Aris does not start with h is own observations but with a celebrated set of logical paradoxes that appeared in the Parmenides ., which supplies Aris with most of his central problems and also with the

terminology and the methods of analyses he uses to resolve them. - Even with the second sense of phainomena –endoxa, legomena– some distinctions lie concealed . Legomena can be an appeal to common belief about matters of fact, or to established forms of language, or to a philosophical thesis claiming the factual virtues of the first and the analytic certainty of the second. And the broader ambiguity between the two senses could be exposed by Aris. For when he wants to restrict  phainomenon  to its first sense he calls it ”a perceptual phenomenon” and distinguishes it from endoxon. Hence Owen thinks that it is a mistake to ask, in the hope of quite a general answer, for the function Aris assigns to phainomena, or aporiai, or epagoge , for the function varies with the context and style of inquiry. Yet the uses of phainomena have much in common. F . e., it is not a peculiarity of phainomena in the second sense that they may fail to stand up for examination, for the same happens with the phainomena of perception which are the touchstone for the correctness of physical pples. Indeed Aris came to realize that even the observations of astronomers were inadequate and mere hearsay, legomena to be treated with caution, in need to be properly established to qualify as firm data. Nor, if Aris associates the phainomena with experience ( empireia ), as he does in the text from the Analytics , must it be supposed that his words are meant to apply only to phainomena in the first sense. Endoxa also rest on experience, even if they misrepresent it. This is why Aris could include in his epistemology that tif an endoxon is shared by all men is ipso facto beyond challenge (EN X 2, 1172b36-1173a1; cf. VII 13, 1135b27-28; EE I 6, 1216b26-35).

It is not surprising that writing in the tradition of Parmenides and Protagoras Aris tended to assimilate the different senses of phainomena .  For Parmenides, the ‘mortal opinions” include not only the supposed evidence of the senses but the common assumptions and the common uses of language which form men’s picture of the physical world. As for Protagoras, both Plato and Aris represent his theory as applying indifferently to perceptual phainomena and endoxa , and use phainestai in describing both these applications. Same in the formula from the Prior Analytics.  And though in the De Caelo , Aris says that the phenomena of perception are the ones by which the adequacy of our pples in physics are to be tested, he is speaking of physics as a whole, a body of science, not of his own Physics, where he does not start with inspections of the world but with the familiar data of dialectic (for he observes at the end that he has been speaking about the way in which the premisses of deductive argument are to be chosen, and refers to the more detailed treatment of the same matter in the ‘treatise on dialectic,” i.e., the Topics , where the premises of scientific argument are allowed to be established  by methods that start with the endoxa.

In the second Part, Owen turns to the Parmenides and  the part played by the arguments

in which Aris is the interlocutor, in shaping the Physics . Perhaps is by misreading the Physics that critics like Ross have been led to make excessive claims of its originality.          

------------------------------------------------------------------------

^(F1) Martha Craven Nussbaum, “Saving Aristotle’s Appearances,” in Language and Logos: Studies in Ancient Greek Philosophy presented to G.E.L. Owen, Edited by Malcomlm Schofield and Martha Craven Nussbaum, (Cambridge U Press, 1982)  p. 267. Ancient Greek Philosophy presented to G.E.L. Owen, Edited by Malcolm in

^(F2) Most likely,  “Appearances” or phainomena originally referred to the object’s sensible appearances rejected by Plato. Then it referred to people’s spontaneous linguistic beliefs or stated opinions. Then, with Aristotle, the word referred to people’s stated beliefs which, when reflected upon and supported with sufficient reason for affirming or denying, became judgments that corresponded to what was the case, to “reality.” When the content of the statements became objectified and seen in isolation from the circumstances in which the judgments originated, the Aristotelian categories appeared, from which arose logic and metaphysics as well as the misconception of statements as theoretical representations of reality. In the meantime, the connection of language and knowledge with action either never emerged or disappeared. Hence the division into theoretical and practical knowledge.

^(F3) See G. E. L. Owen,   “Tithenai ta phainomena,” in   Aristote et les problèmes de méthode (Louvain 1961) pp. 83-103. Also in Articles on Aristottle, (vol. 1: Science), edited by Jonathan Barnes, Malcolm Schofield, Richard Sorabji, Gerald Duckwoth & Company Limited, London 1975).

^(F4) This is Nussbaum’s translation.

^(F5) Ibid ., p. 271

^(F6) Ibid.

^(F7) Ibid. , p. 273. Actually Owen thinks that Aristotle’s ambiguity is more extended than two senses. And, unfortunately, Owen doesn’t include action – our practices–  among those senses.

^(F8)

^(F9) Ibid. , pp. 274-275.

^(F10) Ibid. , p. 275.

^(F11) Ibid. , p. 276.

^(F12) Ibid. , pp. 276-277.

^(F13) Ibid. , p. 278.

^(F14) Ibid.

^(F15) Ibid., pp. 278-279.

^(F16) Ibid. , pp. 280-282.

^(F17) Owen’s translation. Notice the difference between his “as in other cases) and Nussbaum “as in all other cases.
