---
title: "SEP92-1B"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/SEP92-1B"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.0
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\WP\CHANTILL\SEP92-1b September 3, 92

IS THERE A CATHOLIC INTELLECTUAL TRADITION?:

AN EXPLORATION

I chose this difficult subject because it is closely connected with the issue of the relationship between faith and reason which has interested me during all my adult life and has constituted the very focus of my research for the last six or seven years. However, I was also prompted to deal with this subject by the fact that I work in this University in whose main documents something called "The Catholic Intellectual Tradition" is revered and in which we are frequently exhorted to explore and implement its meaning. Unfortunately, this meaning is never spelled out satisfactorily. Of course, there are a few sonorous declarations here and there, generally composed by rather heterogeneous committees. But one would hardly know from such declarations what is distinctively Catholic in the tradition, in what sense it is an intellectual tradition, much less what exploring the tradition would amount to. In short, my impatience with this rhetoric persuaded me that some work on this subject was particularly opportune.

As far as the Catholic intellectual tradition is concerned, I come before you with modest claims and expectations. Since the first problem in this matter is to give a definite and persuasive content to the expression "the Catholic intellectual tradition," it seemed to me appropriate to look back into the Catholic intellectual history in search of something that could aspire to that title. Indeed, to be such a tradition it had to come to us from the past while continuing to nourish us in the present, it had to be related in one way or another to Christian convictions, and it had to concern the intellectual life. I found one definite candidate to the title, which at least in the past has been identified by many as the Catholic intellectual tradition. Now, my claim is not that what I will here identify as the Catholic intellectual tradition is what the University of Dayton means; only that there are persuasive reasons to understand the Catholic intellectual tradition the way I do here. So much for my claim. As for my expectations, I simply hope that if my understanding and appraisal of the Catholic intellectual tradition are found to be wrongheaded or unpersuasive, those who have a better and more persuasive alternative will propose it to allay the perplexity of at least one member of this university, myself. If that happens, I will be more than glad to have been proven wrong.

                    PART ONE

A CATHOLIC INTELLECTUAL TRADITION

What are we talking about?

The Catholic intellectual tradition--an encompassing and elusive term difficult to define. As a preliminary approach, I propose that it is generally used to designate an attitude of full openness to the truth, to all truth, whether it originates from God's revelation or from human inquiry. Of course, this attitude represents an ideal to which many of us Catholics obviously do not live up; however, the notion itself of Catholic tradition implies that we Catholics are called to live up to it precisely because we are Catholics. In other words, the term "the Catholic intellectual tradition" designates not only the attitude but together with it the faith by which the attitude is inspired and from which it is inseparable. This is why the attitude is Catholic rather than anything else, and why Catholics, particularly Catholic intellectuals involved in the quest for truth, are expected and required to exhibit it in their intellectual lives.

We are likely to gain a deeper and more precise understanding of this complex matter if we consider the way in which the medieval Catholic intellectuals faced and dealt with the irruption of the bulk of the Aristotelian corpus between the second half of the twelfth and the first half of the thirteenth centuries. ^(E1) Indeed, the notion itself of Catholic intellectual tradition has in the past been frequently and pointedly linked to that event, and not without reason. Allow me to explain this historical linkage.

The story goes as follows. Unexpectedly confronted through Aristotle's works with a worldview which owed nothing to divine revelation and which by its all-embracing scope and its strictly rational character seemed to threaten their own worldview shaped by the Bible, the medieval intellectuals faced the problem squarely, learned to distinguish faith from reason, had the courage to grant reason its autonomy within its proper realm while keeping the integrity of their faith, and eagerly integrated into their own whatever in the Aristotelian worldview seemed to them to be true.

Was the attitude of these people a mere historical accident, or was it, rather, a Catholic attitude, that is, an attitude inspired by and grounded in their Catholic faith? We get the answer to this important question from the very people who were involved in the storm. Aquinas among other of his contemporaries and immediate predecessors expressed clearly and succinctly the grounds for this attitude. A Christian has nothing to fear from truth whatever its origin and has every reason to look for the truth by rational means and embrace it wholeheartedly. Why? Because the God of the Christian faith is Himself the Truth and the origin of all truth. There cannot be any real contradiction between the truths divinely revealed and the truths reached by purely rational means because God made us rational and cannot therefore require that we assent to divergent statements about the same matter. Some of the truths revealed do lie beyond the reach of human reason left to its own devices and even surpass full human comprehension, but none of them can be strictly irrational, for this would amount on God's part to demanding from creatures He made rational to assent to something to which it is impossible to assent. ^(E2) It is on this basis, inseparably connected with the Catholic faith, that the Catholic as a Catholic stands confident and openminded, avoiding, on the one hand, a fideism that would protect the Christian faith, but at the price of rendering it blind and of depriving people from the natural complement and extension that the knowledge acquired from divine revelation finds in the knowledge acquired through reason, and, on the other hand, a rationalism that would protect human reason, but at the price of rendering divine revelation and religious faith impossible and of depriving people from the knowledge owed to divine revelation, in which the knowledge acquired through reason finds its gracious, supernatural complement and extension. The truth is one.

Not for nothing did Aquinas become in time, more so than any other historical figure, the incarnated symbol of the Catholic intellectual tradition. ^(E3) For not only did he himself exemplify in his encounter with the Aristotelian worldview the attitude toward truth that he thought ought to characterize Catholics, and not only did he explain why it ought to characterize them, but using tools and concepts borrowed from Aristotle himself he gave final shape to the synthesis of faith and reason that had been in the workings for at least half a century before him. With him what is today called "the Catholic intellectual tradition" came of age, for in large part thanks to him this tradition found its firm intellectual foundation on a clear, reasoned view of the ultimately harmonious relationship between faith and reason to which Catholics, and even non-Catholics who work in Catholic intellectual institutions, continue to appeal today. Indeed, don't we Catholic intellectuals speak confidently of the unity of the truth, of the rationality of our faith, of the impossibility of a real contradiction between faith and reason, of the autonomy of reason within its proper realm, of our eagerness to learn from any quarter where truth may be found? Don't we justify on this basis as characteristically Catholic the very existence of our openminded universities, and in particular the traditional coexistence within them of a Department of philosophy side by side with a Department of theology? Don't we claim that each of these Departments is the necessary complement of the other? Have I not even heard some non-Catholic members of the university of Dayton argue that precisely because it is a Catholic university it ought to have a graduate program in philosophy? And to what are we appealing in all these cases if not to the synthesis of faith and reason to which Aquinas gave shape, whether or not we are fully familiar with it?

Let me conclude with a formulation of the insights gained in the course of the previous analysis. What is meant by "the Catholic intellectual tradition" is complex. It is, in the first place, an attitude of openness to the truth whatever its origin, which because of its direct relationship to the truth is an intellectual attitude. Secondly, it is an attitude inspired by and inseparable from such convictions as that God created us and created us rational, that God has revealed to us certain truths about Himself, that God is the Truth and cannot contradict Himself, etc., which make of it a distinctively Catholic attitude. Thirdly--and this, too, is in part why the tradition is characterized as intellectual --it involves, at least implicitly, a definite and reasoned view of faith, of reason, and of their harmonious relationship, namely, the view which Thomas Aquinas brought to fully mature formulation in response to the crisis provoked by the irruption of the major Aristotelian works into the Western world.

There is, however, an aspect of the tradition that was not included in the preceding analysis, namely, that it constitutes a tradition . Now, to say that something is or constitutes a tradition means that it functions as traditions are supposed to function, that is, that it carries the people who live from it toward the future it defines as much as it is carried and lived by them. This, indeed, is how traditions function when they function as traditions. But they do that only insofar as they are genuinely alive and, as MacIntyre would say, "in good order." Is this the case with the version of the Catholic intellectual tradition I have been talking about? To find the answer to this question we have to engage in an historical reflection on the tradition from its origins to the present.

A reflective look at the tradition

Given the historical role that this conception of the Catholic intellectual tradition has played among Catholic intellectuals in the past and at least to an extent continues to play in Catholic universities, the question of its vitality and good order is important. The question is all the more urgent in that today there seem to be serious historical reasons to doubt that the tradition is genuinely alive and in good order and even that it ever was. To show this I will broach a rapid sketch made up of only a few but, I think, highly significant traits.

The intellectual history of the second half of the thirteenth century is enlightening. Supposedly, in his synthesis Aquinas had laid the theoretical foundations for a harmonious coexistence between reason and faith, such that the faithful could honestly and confidently preserve the integrity of their faith while being enriched with the knowledge acquired through reason and even actively contributing to widen the frontiers of such knowledge. Somehow, however, the actual events did not quite correspond to the script. Already in the third quarter of the thirteenth century, during Aquinas' life, there was a strong movement among philosophers, particularly in Paris and Oxford, to proclaim their intellectual independence from ecclesiastical authorities and their right to pursue their rational quest wherever it might lead them. ^(E4) Chenu summarizes some of the doctrines that by the end of the thirteenth century had begun to filter down from the universities to the people at large:

"Theology is made up of fables, philosophers are the sages of this world, Christianity is an obstacle to knowledge, there is happiness only in this world, there is nothing after death, it is silly to care for Christian burial, confession is just a rite, praying is an idle exercise, fornication is no sin, virginity is unnatural, etc." ^(E5)

Needless to say, the ecclesiastical authorities, understandably worried about the preservation of the Christian faith and morals, had long before felt constrained to intervene again and again with exhortations, admonitions, interdictions, condemnations and fulminations. Aquinas himself did not escape unscathed. Just three years after his death, in 1277, the theologians of the University of Paris, headed by the bishop of the city, condemned 219 propositions. "Thomas Aquinas was involved in that condemnation which more or less explicitly concerned some twenty points characteristic of his Aristotelianism, for Aristotelianism was deemed to be at the root... A few days later, a similar measure, more restrained but no less precise, proceeding this time from the archbishop of Canterbury..., mirrored the Parisian condemnation." ^(E6)  

 Let us be fair. Aquinas' condemnation was unwarranted, as it was later clearly acknowledged by the Church herself, who canonized him in 1323. Furthermore, as far as his views are concerned, Aquinas, who had explicitly proclaimed the autonomy of reason, had no less explicitly limited that autonomy to reason working within its proper domain. ^(E7) In matters preempted by divine revelation Aquinas had clearly subordinated philosophy to theology as its humble servant--its ancilla , and both of them to faith. He would, therefore, most certainly have opposed the doctrines of which Chenu gave us a summary and would have wholeheartedly sided with the ecclesiastical authorities on these issues. ^(E8) Thus, it would seem to be grossly unfair to blame Aquinas' synthesis for abuses that contradicted fundamental principles of the synthesis.

On second thought, however, it does not seem quite unreasonable to trace the uses or abuses to which we are referring back to Aquinas. Indeed, his synthesis is such that it claims to grant reason its autonomy when in fact it does not. To grant reason its autonomy is to acknowledge the right of reason to proceed according to its own laws and resources. Now, is it not the very nature of reason to aim unimpededly at whatever can be known, and to assent to whatever becomes compellingly evident to reason? Thus, to say that the proper domain of reason is defined and limited by what is revealed amounts to saying that reason is not autonomous. It seems, therefore, that it was not by mere historical accident that the events did not square with Aquinas' expectations and those of his followers. His script itself was such that it was bound to result in, and even render inevitable, the kind of conflicts that actually occurred. For, on the one hand, by exalting reason and proclaiming its natural autonomy in the confidence that truth was one and there could be no contradiction between rational and revealed truths, Aquinas' synthesis invited people to move openmindedly toward truth whatever its origin, which is what the rebellious philosophers of the thirteenth century did. On the other hand, however, by subordinating reason to faith and restraining the natural field of the former to what had not been preempted by the latter Aquinas obviously invited, justified and even prescribed the interventions of the ecclesiastical authorities. ^(E9)

It may be argued that this is a misrepresentation of Aquinas' synthesis, for his synthesis includes the possibility of apparent contradictions between revealed truths and conclusions reached through the use of reason, which at least implicitly amounts to an invitation to patience on the part of the ecclesiastical authorities in the confidence that the apparent contradictions will in due time find a solution and dissolve. The objection, however, ignores that it is also part of the Thomistic synthesis that the solution will always and necessarily fall in favor of the truths revealed and, therefore, that Catholics have the obligation to give their assent to the truths of faith and refuse it to the apparent truths of reason. ^(E10) Needless to say, apart from the fact that this sends us back to square one concerning the issue of the genuiness of the autonomy that reason enjoys in the Thomistic synthesis, it fully justifies the interventions of religious authorities against the people who trusted the reason with which they had been endowed by God and assented to conclusions that contradicted the truths of faith.

Let us move to another significant event in which Aquinas' synthesis of faith and reason was put to the test, namely, the condemnation of Galileo. As part and parcel of his synthesis of the harmonious relationship between faith and reason, Aquinas maintained, as we were just reminded, that when there is an apparent contradiction between revealed truths and the conclusions of reason, Catholics--and in particular Catholic intellectuals--should firmly and confidently refuse to assent to the latter, for the fomer would end up prevailing. This was the basis on which the Italian ecclesiastical authorities intervened in Galileo's case. Here again, however, things did not work out according to the script. Ironically, what ended up prevailing was the claim of reason, with the consequence that what had until then appeared as a truth constitutive of the Catholic faith was  finally discarded, to the understandable confusion of the faithful. Less dramatically, perhaps, because the Inquisition was not involved, but no less undeniably, something similar happened, contrary to Aquinas' expectations, in the case of the Darwininan doctrine of evolution and, still more recently, in the cases concerning the historicity of important portions of the Bible and the inerrancy of the Bible itself. Of course, I am perfectly aware that for each of these cases those Catholics whose sensibility has been shaped by the Thomistic synthesis have contrived ad hoc solutions rather than renouncing the synthesis, and have even claimed that the work of reason has helped us to gain a more exact view of our faith. ^(E11) However, given the obvious contradiction between the Thomistic script and the actual facts, I, for one, cannot help contesting, if not the good faith, at least the perceptiveness of those who would insist in considering Aquinas' syntehsis successful.

Is what I have identified as the Catholic intellectual tradition in good order? I do not see how. Is it alive? Yes, if by this we mean that it survives in the rhetoric of Catholic universities which continue, no doubt with good intentions, to pay lip service to it when convenient and to safely ignore or disregard it when convenient. Yes, if by this we mean that Catholic universities continue to have a department of theology (or should we say of religious studies?) side by side with a department of philosophy, which were originally supposed to complement each other, the former working in direct subordination to revealed truth and the latter in an autonomy limited to the proper domain of reason, though everybody knows that both the complementarity and the supposed identity of these departments are a myth. Yes, if by this we mean that there are sporadic an timid admonitions and interventions of the ecclesiastical authorities in the life of Catholic universities, and that these are privately considered as intrusions, ashamedly hush-hushed, and discretely explained away for the benefit of the non-Catholic members of our universities as painful relics of a distant and disavowed past. For my part, given that no better and more persuasive version of what is meant by the Catholic intellectual tradition has been presented to me, I think it more honest to say that if such a tradition was ever alive it is now well dead, and that, at least nowadays, we Catholics have no distinctively Catholic intellectual tradition with which we can identify. In other words, our rhetoric about the Catholic intellectual tradition is vacuous, for the queen is naked.  

So much for my claim concerning the Catholic intellectual tradition. I hope it is clear that I am one of those who would like to put to eternal rest at least the version of it of which I have been speaking, for neither as a Catholic nor as an intellectual can I live from such a tradition, nor do I see the Catholic institutions of learning living from it. As for my expectations, I maintain them. I will gladly be proven wrong, and I will listen to anybody who has a more persuasive candidate to propose to bear the title of "the Catholic intellectual tradition."

Having presented my case, I would like to stop here. Unfortunately for me, and even more so for you, I cannot, for I could rightly be accused of having cut the story short in order to avoid very unsavory consequences that affect those of us who, like myself, are Catholics. All I can promise is that I will be briefer in my second part, perhaps at the price of making myself less easily intelligible.

PART TWO

REASON AND FAITH

Yes, I have not yet told the whole story. What has been left out?

The triumph of reason over faith

If only the failure of the Thomistic synthesis of faith and reason and consequently of the intellectual tradition grounded in it were involved in this matter, the loss for us Catholics would amount simply to a disappointment. A synthesis on which we had for a long while placed our hopes failed. That is a loss with which we Catholics can live. However, much more seems to be involved when we follow the story to its bitter end.

I have contested the validity of Aquinas' synthesis, but I do not contest his good faith. It takes time for the sugar to melt, and what is possible for us to see with the added perspective of seven centuries could not be seen by Aquinas. In all good faith, then, Aquinas thought that his synthesis had made room for reason within faith. What actually happened, however, was not only that reason went its own way without heeding faith, and not only that certain of the truths of reason happened to contradict truths that had been considered of faith, but also that, in the historical evolution of the confrontation between faith and reason, the respective roles of faith and reason became inverted, so that by Kant's time the real problem was no longer making room for reason within faith but making room for faith within reason.

Now, it is highly doubtful, at least to me, that Kant's attempt in the Critique of Practical Reason succeeded in achieving this purpose. Moreover, it is evident, at least to me, that Aquinas would have found unacceptable a view that ultimately made of faith the ancilla of reason, and that he would have been unable to recognize his Christian faith in the blind, strictly natural and purely ethical faith of Kant's Second Critique or of Religion within the Limits of Reason . But was not this result inscribed in the Thomist synthesis itself? I think so. For Aquinas's synthesis, boldly undertaken on the basis of his idea of the unity of truth and of his confidence in the ultimately harmonious relationship between faith and reason, placed faith and reason on the same level by classifying faith under the category of knowledge, the difference between the knowledge of reason and the knowledge of faith being that the former rests on evidence and the latter on God's authority. Indeed, only on this basis is the complementarity Aquinas affirms between faith and reason conceivable. History, however, has abundantly shown that this amounted to setting faith and reason on a collision course in which, given the all-embracing character of reason and its natural reliance on evidence, reason was bound to have the upper hand. Thus, the best that could be expected was that the Thomistic project of making room for reason within faith would terminate in the project of making room for faith within reason. This project, however, failed with Kant, as I believe it was bound to.

Thus, the bitter end of the story--bitter at least for us Catholics--seems to be that reason won the war. And this lesson has not been wasted on people, as indicated by the exodus from the home of faith to the home of reason which has undeniably taken place, particularly among intellectuals, during the last two centuries. As for those of us who have stubbornly refused to abandon the old, warm home of faith, the bitter end of the story I have been telling is the agonizing dilemma with which we are confronted and which other more daring intellectuals have long resolved: either to give up our rationality in order to keep our faith, or to give up our faith in order to go on functioning as  rational beings.

I suspect that this is the way in which  at least those intellectuals liberated from what they take for burdensome and irrational religious commitments see the predicament of Catholic intellectuals, and why at least some of them probably wonder by what sleight of hand certain people like myself, who --I hope!--do not otherwise appear to be totally stupid, manage to cling to their faith. This is a reaction that I understand perfectly and find natural, under our cultural circumstances. So I think that an explanation of the way in which I, if not others, deal with the dilemma is in order.

My sleight of hand

As I just said, under our cultural circumstances, I find the reaction of those who see faith as incompatible with reason perfectly understandable and natural. In fact, I find it even enlightening, for it shows the extent to which the prevailing understanding of faith and of reason by both Catholics and non-Catholics is still dependent on Aquinas' views. For, as a protestant theologian has shrewedly observed, what has changed since the Middle Ages is not the understanding we share with Aquinas of "revelation as communicating a body of knowledge, some part at least of which could be independently obtained, or at least verified, by 'the light of reason and nature,' while the remainder was supplemental to what could be so obtained and verified"; all that has changed is "the balance of emphasis as between them...," the more extreme of the rationalists going "so far as to deny that any revelation had been vouchsafed to us..." ^(E12)  This point deserves close attention.

Aquinas' synthesis involves a claim of complementarity between faith and reason. Now, as already remarked, such complementarity is conceivable only if one understands God's revelation and the act of faith in the way Aquinas did. According to Aquinas, God's revelation consists in the transmission of divine knowledge to us, and the act of faith consequently consists in intellectual assent to the knowledge revealed by God, not on the basis of its evidence but on the basis of God's authority. Only because God's revelation and the act of faith are so conceived can the truth be one in the way in which Aquinas means this, namely, as the complete picture of reality to which faith and reason contribute their respective portions. ^(E13)

I must say, however, that I am in profound disagreement with Aquinas, because, along with many others, I fail to recognize in his idea of revelation as transmission of knowledge and of intellectual assent as the primary response to God's revelation the domain of faith in which I actually live as a Catholic. ^(E14) Unfortunately, whether I like it or not, this is the form under which faith entered its historical confrontation with reason and under which--not unreasonably, in my opinion--it is today rejected by many. ^(E15)  For my part, I have already abundantly conceded that faith understood in this way has fared very poorly indeed in the course of history. But I do not feel particularly threatened by that, for the faith I live as a Catholic has little to do with the faith of Aquinas' analysis. In other words, while I share with Aquinas the faith he actually lived as a Catholic, I think he was tragically wrong in his philosophical analysis of it.

But let me come to reason. For I think that we are as confused in our views of reason and what is rational as we are on our views of faith, and for the same reason, namely, that we are uncritically dependent on our cultural past.

What view of reason did Aquinas have that allowed him to see a possible complementarity between reason and faith? From the protracted debate that took place among Catholic intellectuals in the first half of the thirteenth century about the feasibility and propriety of conjugating their faith with reason we know for certain that the referent of the participants in the debate, Aquinas included, was the model of rationality and of knowledge proposed by Aristotle in the Posterior Analytics . ^(E16) Roughly speaking, for Aristotle, in that particular work, a science is a corpus of logically interconnected statements about a class of objects, expressing universal and necessary properties belonging to that class of objects by virtue of their essential nature, and resulting either from immediate self-evidence in the case of 'first principles,' or from strictly deductive evidence in all other cases. Ideally at least, in this Aristotelian vision, there is an interconnection and a hierarchical subordination among the different sciences, at the top of which reigns the most encompassing of them all and from which all the others receive their ultimate principles, namely, metaphysics or prima philosophia --the science of being, the domain reserved to philosophers-kings. I pointedly use this Platonic expression, for it is not difficult to perceive in this Aristotelian conception the strong influence of Plato. Not for nothing has it been said that what Aristotle did, in the regard that concerns us here, was to bring the Platonic Forms from their ideal heaven to the universe of reality.

I am perfectly aware that such a lofty conception of rationality and of the powers of human reason, however flattering to us, is highly problematic in multiple ways. Whether such knowledge even within a limited domain is possible at all, whether Aristotle's works correspond to his own precepts, whether in the Posterior Analytics Aristotle was referring to the transmission of an already acquired corpus of knowledge rather than to its acquisition, whether he changed his mind about the possibility of such knowledge or proposed other alternatives which are more realistic or reflect better his own practice or our own, are very pertinent questions to which much attention has been given in recent years by specialists like Mansion, Owens and Nussbaum among many others. For my purposes, however, such issues are of no immediate relevance, for they lie for the most part beyond the horizon of the medieval intellectuals to whom I am referring. The view of reason of the Posterior Analytics fascinated them, they did not doubt that Aristotle had correctly grasped the nature, the powers, the procedures and the forseeable  achievements of reason, and that he himself in his metaphysics or supreme science of being had laid the foundations on which in time the less eminent and subordinated sciences would progress. As they gradually came to see this matter in the course of their intense debate, all that was needed was to add to the knowledge that a pagan deprived of the light of faith had, the divinely revealed knowledge he could not have had, to correct him on those points on which his deprivation had unavoidably made him err, and to complete his hierarchy of the sciences by crowining it with the queen of them all--theology.  

What I want to examine now is how well this Aristotelian notion of reason incorporated by Aquinas into our Western culture actually fared in history. And the answer is: as poorly as Aquinas' notion of faith. Indeed, had the Aristotelian conception of reason fared well, things would have worked according to the Aristotelian script. This means that we would by now be in secure possession of the knowledge of essential natures to which reason as understood by Aristotle was supposed to lead us. In addition, Aristotle's science of being, that is, metaphysics, would today undisputedly occupy the supreme place it was meant to occupy; the less eminent sciences would show their subordination to metaphysics; a unified, organic body of knowledge of reality would have resulted, and philosophers-metaphysicians as the highest representatives of reason would by now be the revered kings if not of the city at least of academia.

Now, concerning the importance and the supremacy of metaphysics, we do not even have to refer to Kant's criticism of "the ideas of reason," for by then the knowledge of being had already been supplanted by the knowledge of functioning and the search for essential natures by the search for experimentally testable hypotheses. As far as a unified, organic body of knowledge is concerned, if there is one today, of which I see no evidence, it certainly is not of the kind that was to be expected from the Aristotelian notion of reason. As for the destiny of philosophers, precisely because we are perceived--perhaps in part through our own fault--as the historical representatives of a conception of reason that does not square with our human--all too human--abilities and limitations and is in utter bankruptcy, far from our having become the kings of academia we have been relegated to a corner of doubtful academic legitimacy. In short, the actual historical facts correspond as little to the script inspired by the conception of reason the medievals borrowed from Aristotle as they correspond to the script inspired by Aquinas' conception of faith and of its relationship to reason.

You may now understand why, under these circumstances, I do not feel confronted with a dilemma that would contrain me to choose between faith and reason. If I recognized the faith I live as a Catholic in Aquinas' analysis of faith, and if I recognized human reason and rationality in the Aristotelian analysis of the Posterior Analytics , and if I thought that the Aristotelian script had proven itself in history, then I would have a dilemma. But I don't. And if I am expected to abandon the home of my faith for the sake of the home of Aristotelian reason I do not feel tempted at all.

Needless to say, I realize, as everybody does, that our Western views of reason and rationality were profoundly modified in the seventeenth century with the appearance of the

natural sciences as experimental, which ultimately brought about the demise of the Aristotelian conception of reason until then undisputed. But does this entirely different conception of reason and rationality constrain me to abandon the home of my faith in order to remain rational? I simply do not see how or why. Most certainly, the claim that the type of rationality at work in the natural sciences and the knowledge gained through their experimental method are to be equated with rationality as such and with knowledge as such expresses a conviction that is not reached reached through the application of that method and clearly lies beyond the domain of those sciences. In fact, I think that this quasi-religious faith in 'science,' so common today, is just another version of the Platonic view inherited by the Aristotle of the Posterior Analytics and through him by the medievals that reason and knowledge are univocal terms, which led them to the idea that all the sciences were to be hierarchically related to each other and all the knowledge resulting from them was to form one big picture of reality.

In any case, my experience of the achievements of the natural sciences does not lead me at all to conclude that we can expect from them anything that by itself will make sense in one way or another of the human condition. In spite of the undeniable achievements of the natural sciences, which I gladly welcome, I see that their practitioners themselves and the people who put their faith in that kind of rationality as the panacea continue to struggle as well as they can, like everybody else, with normative questions and with ultimate existential questions which lie totally beyond the horizon of technical rationality. As the protagonist of Nabokov's Lolita puts it in his only genuinely reflective moment in the novel,

"Unless it can be proven to me--to me as I am now, today, with my heart and my beard, and my putrefaction--that in the long run it does not matter a jot that a North-American child-girl named Dolores Haze had been deprived of her childhood by a maniac, unless this can be proven (and if it can, then life is a  joke), I see nothing for the treatment of my misery but the melancholy and very local palliative of articulate art." ^(E17)

Does anyone seriously expect that technical reason will answer or dissolve questions of this kind? Well, I, for one, don't, and I do not think I am any less rational for that.

Thus, as I said to my fellow Catholics that I think that we are deluding ourselves and others in claiming that we have  an identifiable Catholic intellectual tradition that is alive and commonly shared and capable of carrying us by the definite shape it gives to our future as intellectuals, I say to my non-religious fellows that they delude themselves if they think that the fact that they have no religious commitments automatically imparts to them the monopoly of rationality. And I personally believe that we both, Catholics and non-Catholics engaged in the work of a university would gain much by getting rid of our respective myths, for that would allow us to work more tolerantly with each other and listen to each other as plain human beings without labels.

If some of you consider a sleight of hand my way of dealing with the dilemma between faith and reason as it is generally understood, I will gladly listen to you, as I will gladly listen to anyone who presents an alternative that allays my perplexity concerning our references to the Catholic intellectual tradition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

^(E1) See Ferdinand van Steenberghen, La philosophie au XIIIe siècle

(Louvain, Publications Universitaires, 1966). Regarding the influence exerted by the Aristotelian corpus this work remains fundamental. Concerning in particular the theological problems posed by the encounter with Aristotle's works and the elaboration of a synthesis of faith and reason, see M.-D. Chenu, La théologie comme science au XIIIe siècl e, Troisième Edition (Paris, Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin, 1957).

^(E2) "Dona gratiarum hoc modo naturae adduntur, quod eam non tollunt, sed magis perficiunt; unde et lumen fidei quod nobis gratis infunditur, non destruit lumen naturalis cognitionis nobis naturaliter inditum. Quamvis autem naturale lumen mentis humanae sit insufficiens ad manifestationem eorum quae per fidem manifestantur, tamen impossibile est quod ea quae per fidem nobis traduntur divinitus, sint contraria his quae per naturam nobis sunt indita: oporteret enim alterum esse falsum, et cum utrumque sit nobis a Deo Deus esset nobis auctor falsitatis, quod est impossibile; sed magis cum imperfectis inveniantur aliqua imitatio perfectorum, quamvis imperfecta, in his quae per naturalem rationem cognoscuntur, sunt quaedam similitudines eorum quae per fidem tradita sunt. Sicut autem sacra doctrina fundatur super lumen fidei, ita philosophia super lumen naturale rationis; unde impossibile est quod ea quae sunt philosophiae sint contraria eis quae sunt fidei..." ( In Boetium de Trinitate , q. 2, a. 3). The same views are presented by Aquinas, in even greater detail, in chapter VII of the Summa contra Gentiles .

^(E3) Needless to say, the way in which I understand Aquinas's synthesis of faith and reason is my own interpretation. From that, of course, there is no escape. Other interpretations of Aquinas' contribution to the Catholic intellectual tradition are possible. Just two years ago, in the published text of his Gifford Lectures, MacIntyre presented a highly sophisticated one which is very different from the one I present here (Alasdair MacIntyre, Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry: Encyclopaedia, Genealogy, and Tradition , University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, Indiana 1990). I have no doubt that MacIntyre would be as unahappy with my reading of Aquinas' concernig faith and reason as he is with the reading of most everyone of Aquinas' interpreters from the fourteenth century through Maréchal and Maritain in the twentieth.

  Whatever the merits or demerits of MacIntyre's own reading of Aquinas's, I want to point out a significant difference between his project and mine. For his own very legitimate purposes, MacIntyre is interested in rediscovering the thought of the 'real' Aquinas, whereas my intention here is to uncover the way in which Aquinas' thought actually entered history and inaugurated an intellectual tradition concerning faith, reason, and their relationship. Whether or not this corresponds to the thought of the 'real' Aquinas is not my central concern.  

  In his McAuley lecture of 1966, symptomatically entitled "On the Art of Misunderstanding Thomism," Gilson began by saying:

"The destiny of Thomism is a curious one. Were I invited to say what it is, I should feel rather perplexed.

"The obvious answer is that Thomism is the doctrine of Thomas Aquinas, such as he himself understood it. The answer is not only obvious; it is correct. But it invites a second question: how did Thomas himself understand his own doctrine? What did he really intend to say? Now to that second question, the answer is provided by the colossal literature heaped up, during the course of seven centuries by the countless interpreters of his works. What we call the doctrine of Thomas Aquinas is what we consider as having been his own thought. But what was his own thought? The answer of the historians is not unanimous...

"What then is the Thomism I now have in mind? It is what most people think it is" ( The McAuley Lectures, 1966: In Search of Saint Thomas Aquinas , Saint Joseph College, West Hartford, Connecticut, p. 33).

  It is by this criterion--"Thomism is what most people think it is"--that I have guided myself in this lecture. Now, it seems to me that, for good or bad, the way in which Aquinas was generally understood and in which his thought shaped history and created an intellectual tradition supports my interpretation. By contrast, as explicitly acknowledged by MacIntyre himself, what he takes it to be the 'real' Aquinas' contribution to the tradition of enquiry that had existed before him did not actually succeed in adding vitality to the tradition but, surprisingly, coincided with its end:

"But what is at first sight astonishing is that with Aquinas those histories ["one of which runs through Plato and Augustine, the other through Plato, Aristotle and the Islamic commentators" and which "culminate and merge" in Aquinas' work] not only merge but to a remarkable degree terminate, that the unity of system, craft, and tradition in philosophy, at its point of highest achievement, largely disappears from view" ( Ibid ., p. 150).

^(E4) "We are... able to fix with great precision the date when the heterodox trend in doctrine... appeared. The event must be placed between the years 1260 and 1265. When St. Thomas left Paris in 1259, there was nothing to suggest the approach of a crisis. By 1266, Siger of Brabant had been teaching for a short time in the Arts Faculty, and from 1267 the subversive teaching in that faculty began to provoke a reaction from St. Bonaventure. In the introduction to the De Unitate Intellectus , written in 1270, St. Thomas says that the error of Averroes has been gaining ground for some time [ " Inolevit siquidem iam dudum circa intellectum error apud multos, ex dictis Averrois sumens exordium" ]. All these facts point in the same direction, namely that it is men of Siger's generation who, shortly after 1260, began to teach a philosophy that was frankly heterodox" (Fernand van Steenberghen, Aristotle in the West , E. Nauwelaerts, Publisher, Louvain 1955, p. 198).

   "From his very first years as a teacher, Siger professed a disquieting Aristotelianism, without regard for theology and orthodox Christian doctrine... The young master, however, was not alone in his opinions, for a notable group of masters nd students shared his ideas, as is clear from texts of St. Bonaventure, St. Thomas, and other contemporaries...

   "... the radical party of Siger mintained an intransigent attitude of fealty to philosophy and especially to Aristotle, who was for them its incarnation" ( Ibid ., p. 210).

   "He [the young master from Brabant] gave himself body and soul to his philosophical calling and the study of the great masters. A striking characteristic of his work is its strict and exclusively rational orientation. He had a keen sense of the autonomy of every science in its own domain, and it was a point of honour with him to quote only from sources that were purely philosophical" ( Ibid ., p. 221).

^(E5) Chenu, ope. cit ., p. 107.

^(E6) Ibid ., p. 106.

^(E7) Pegis expresses well this point:

"Is Thomism and open and autonomous philosophy in its intellectual establishment? Assuredly it is. One may or may not agree with its doctrines, one cannot but agree that St. Thomas considers no notion as part of philosophy, whatever its source, if the human intellect cannot reach it by its own light. Yet Thomism--the Thomism of St. Thomas himself, since I am not here concerned with his commentators--did not purchase this freedom and autonomy by shutting himself off from the influence of revelation. In short, to describe Thomism adequately, we must say that St. Thomas believed unreservedly in a free intellectualism as the charter of philosophy; but we must add that he espoused and cherished the role of the Christian religion in promoting the greater freedom and purity of the intellect in philosophy" (Anton C. Pegis, "Thomism as a Philosophy," The McAuley's Lectures, 1960: Saint Thomas Aquinas and Philosophy , Skaint Joseph College, West Hartford, Connecticut, p. 19).

^(E8) "Since therefore grace does not destroy nature, but perfect it, natural reason should minister to faith..." (I, q. 1, a. 8, ad 2). And even more forcefully and explicitly: "... the knowledge proper to this science [Sacred doctrine] comes through revelation and not through natural reason. Therefore it is not its business to prove the principles of the other sciences, but only to judge them. For whatsoever is found in the other sciences contrary to the truth of this science must be condemned as false" (I, q. 1, a. 6).

^(E9) As indicated above in note 4, what was fundamentally at stake in the dissident trend in doctrine that began to develop at the Univeristy of Paris between 1260 and 1265 and that would result in the condemnation of more than 200 propositions in 1277 was nothing else than the autonomy of reason. This point has been well established by van Steeenberghen in chapter VIII of La Philosophie au XIIIe Siècle . See in particular the section entitled "Aristotélisme hétérodoxe ou Averroisme," pp. 394-400.

^(E10) TO BE CREATED

^(E11) In all fairness it has to be said that Aquinas himself opened the door for this sort of ad hoc explanations. Indeed, he firmly maintained that nothing that is object of faith can be false: "Cum fidei objectum fromale sit veritas prima, non illi potest subesse falsum" ( Summa Theologica IIa IIae, q. 1, a. 3). He admits, however, in the same article, that people of faith can err as to whether a particular item is object of faith: "Possibile est enim ex conjectura humana hominem fidelem falsum aliquid aestimare; sed quod ex fide falsum aestimet, impossibile est" ( Ibid ., ad 3). Yet he also maintained that "Tenetur homo explicite credere omnes fidei articulos, implicite vero quaecumque in sacra traduntur Scriptura" (II IIae, q. 2, a. 5), and suggested that the truths implicated by what is object of faith are also themselves object of faith.

^(E12) For the source and the complete quotation, see note 16.

^(E13) Aquinas's Summa Theologica has no particular section devoted to revelation. For the fact that he sees revelation as transmission of knowledge by God and the knowledge of reason as a complement to revealed knowledge, the classical text is the very first article of the Summa :

"I answer that it was necessary for man's salvation that there should be a doctrine revealed by God, besides the philosophical disciplines investigated by human reason. First, because man is directed to God as to an end that surpasses the grasp of his reason... But the end must first be known by men who are to direct their intentions and actions to the end. Hence it was necessary for the salvation of man that certain truths which exceed human reason should be made known to him by divine revelation. Even as regards those truths about God which human reason can investigate, it was necessary that man be taught by a divine revelation. For the truth about God, such as reason can know it, would only be known by a few, and that after a long time, and with the admixture of many errors; whereas man's whole salvation, which is in God, depends upon the knowledge of this truth. Therefore, in order that the salvation of men might be brought about more fitly and surely, it was necessary that they be taught divine truths by divine revelation. It was therefore necessary that, besides the philosophical disciplines investigated by reason, there should be a sacred doctrine by way of revelation" (I, q. 1, a. 1).

Needless to say, if what God reveals is primarily a doctrine, an infallibly true doctrine, the immediate object of faith has to be a doctrine and the correlative human response to revelation has to be an act of assent to the doctrine because God has revealed it. And this, indeed, is the way in which the object of faith and the act of faith are defined by Aquinas. See Ibid . II IIae, qq. 1-6.

^(E14) As one instance of the "many others," concerning the notion of revelation, see Revelation as History , Edited by Wolfhart Pannenberg, Translated by David Granskou (The Macmillan Company, Toronto 1969). Concerning the notion of faith, see, for instance, Henri de Lubac The Christian Faith (Ignatius Press, San Francisco 1986). Of particular interest to contrast de Lubac's traditional notion of faith with Aquinas' Aristotelian notion is chapter 9. To add to this company, one has only to read the Constitution on Divine Revelation of Vatican II to realize that the notions of revelation as being primarily a doctrine and the response of faith consisting primarily in intellectual assent have been left behind. God reveals Himself (not about Himself) primarily through His historical deeds (Not though statements), and the response of faith consists primarily in submitting oneself totally to Him and cooperating with Him as the Lord of history.

^(E15) As John Baillie observes, "This way of defining revelation as communicating a body of knowledge, some part at least of which could be independently obtained, or at least verified, by 'the light of reason and nature,' while the remainder was supplemental to what could be so obtained or verified, was long to remain unchallenged. For the most part the terms of the distinction were as readily accepted after the close of the Middle Ages as during the course of them, as readily outside Roman orthodoxy as within it. Even as late as 1867 a Calvinist theologian [A. A. Hodge] would be writing:

"We define reason to be man's natural faculty of reaching the truth... without any supernatural assistance. And we define faith, on the other hand, to be the assent of the mind to the truth, upon the testimony of God, conveying knowledge to us through supernatural channels."

"What was disturbed after the break-up of the Middle Ages was not the terms of this distinction, but the balance of emphasis as between them. This happened in two ways. The rationalists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, though rarely quarrelling with the traditional understanding of reason and revelation (so that there was little or no dispute at this point between them and the orthodox apologists who tired to answer them), came to place almost the whole of their reliance on the former, gradually edging the latter out of its former pride of position. The more extreme of them went so far as to deny that any revelation had been vouchsafed to us, asserting that in fact we have no knowledge of divine things save what is discoverable by our own unaided powers...

"So much for the rationalists; but among the early leaders of the Protestant Reformation the medieval balance of reason and revelation had already been disturbed in a very different and indeed opposite way. No more than the rationalists did the Reformers quarrel with the terms of the distinction but, taking a darker view than the medievals of the corruption of human nature, they maintained that human reason was now so damaged an instrument as to yield little or no reliable knowledge of things divine. Accordingly they touch but lightly upon natural theology and base their systems almost wholly upon the reveled Word. Luther, as is well known, has some particularly hard things to say in contempt of reason, and also in contempt of the Scholastic theologians who made so much of it; but at the same time this very turning aside from the light of nature enabled him on occasion to conceive of revelation in other terms than by means of a contrast to that light, and thus to sow certain seeds of thought which were to bear their fruit in a much later period. Calvin, on the other hand, begins his great Institutes by insisting that there is a sensus divinitatis implanted in every human mind and that the contemplation of the word of nature furnishes us with innumerable proofs... Albrecht Ritschl... protests that Calvin himself, in beginning his Institutes with a discussion of natural religion and proceeding from that to the consideration of the Christian revelation, betrays a certain lapse from Luther's principle into something more like the old Scholasticism...

"Well before Ritschl's time, however, the prestige of natural theology had suffered serious diminution under pressure coming from another, though by no means wholly independent, quarter. Towards the end of the eighteenth century the reign of rationalist theology was challenged by the theological thought associated with the beginnings of the Romantic movement, and above all the criticism of Immanuel Kant. It is difficult to think of Kant himself as a romantic, but he was influenced by Rousseau as well as reacting against him; and if he recoiled from Rousseau's sentimentalism, he recoiled even more strongly from the rationalist theology of the Leibnitzo-Wolffian school which had so largely affected him in his students days. The theoretical exercise of reason, he contends, cannot conduct us to any such knowledge or super-sensible reality as religion requires. 'I must therefore,' he writes, 'abolish knowledge to make room for faith" ( Kritik der reinen Vernunft , Preface to 2d ed.)... The Kantian rejection of natural theology is... not unconnected with Luther's earlier suppression of it. On the other hand, the 'faith' in whose interest Kant rejected it is very different from anything that Luther would have recognized under that name. Though set in contrast with the exercise of theoretical reason which had issued in natural theology, it was still a rational faith ( Vernunftglaube ), being in fact an exercise of what he called... the practical reason...

"These influences, acting conjointly, were enough to ensure that the old natural theology, whether as practiced in the Middle Ages or by the rationalist thinkers of the succeeding centuries, should be little heard of among the leading  Continental theologians of the nineteenth century outside the Roman communion." ( The Idea of Revelation in Recent Thought , Columbia University Press, New York 1964, pp. 5).

^(E16) This becomes abundantly clear from a close study of the problems discussed by the participants in the controversy, all of which had to do with the difficulty of squaring the Christian historical faith with the logical demands of the Aristotelian notion of epistéme , not with the notions of sophía and of phrónesis of the Nichomachean Ethics (see M.-D. Chenu, ope. cit .). Aquinas joined the debate relatively late (the question whether faith-- sacra doctrina --was an epistéme -- scientia --was formally raised for the first time in 1240, but had already been informally discussed for years), and he did not modify the terms in which the debate had been engaged. Though Aquinas explicitly

maintains that sacra doctrina is also a "wisdom," that is, a sophía , a practical science ( Summa Theologica I, q. 1, a. 4), he does not withdraw or intend to detract from his previous claim that it is primarily a theoretical science, an epistéme ( Ibid ., I, q. 1, a. 2), and he treats as secondary or incidental the historical facts of the Christian faith, which of course are irreducible to the Aristotelain schema: "Individual facts are not treated in sacred doctrine because it is concerned with them principally; they are rather introduced as examples to be followed in our lives (as in the moral sciences), as well as to establish the authority of those men through whom the divine revelation, on which this sacred scripture or doctrine is based, has come down to us" ( Ibid . , ad 2).

^(E17) Vladimir Nabokov, Lolita (                          ),        p. 258.
