---
title: "2000-nov-2"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/2000/2000-nov-2.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


2000-nov-2

       THE PHILOSOPHICAL AND THE BIBLICAL UNIVERSES OF DISCOURSE
                 (Cf. “99-nov-1": Barth et la connaissance de Dieu)

      “It is only then that questions may be raised about the divine and
      about God, who in any case could not be the God of philosophers, the
      God of metaphysics; for to him “man can neither fall on his knees on
      awe nor sing and dance” (Heidegger, Identitat und Differenz,
      Pfullinger, 1957, p. 70 - Hans Kung, Does God Exist? An answer for
      Today, Transl. Edward Quinn, Doubelday and Comp[any, N.Y. p. 497) (See
      my second book of notes, # 17,May 20, 85).

      The question of God can be tackled only “when Being itself beforehand
      and after extensive preparation has been illuminated and is
      experienced in truth” (Heidegger, Uber den Humanismus, p 26 - Hans
      Kung, p. 497).

      It is perhaps “more expedient to refrain not only from giving an
      answer but even from raising the question” (Sein und Zeit - Hans Kung,
      p. 497).

      “His (Heidegger’s) ontological critique of consciousness found its
      watchword in the assertion that Dasein is “Being in the world.” Since
      that time, many have come to regard it as absurd and wholly obsolete
      to ask how the subject arrives at knowledge of the so called ‘external
      world.’ Heidegger has called the persistence of this question the real
      ‘scandal of philosophy’.” (Gadamer , Philosophical Hermeneutics,”
      Transl David E. Linge, U of Cal. Press, 1977, pp. 118-119).


      Husserl contrasted the natural attitude, which is unreflective and
uncritical or naive, to the philosophical attitude, which is reflective and
critical. The natural attitude is uncritically realistic. Hence the epoche
applied by the critical  philosopher to the data of the natural attitude in
order to neutralize the realistic commitment of the natural attitude while
otherwise preserving the data in their entirety for examination and,
hopefully, eventually, for certification of their reality.

      Needless to say, in the area of divine revelation and faith, the
Christian thinker cannot apply the epoche, for that would amount to
suspending his or her commitment of faith to the
truth-reality of God’s revelation. In this regard, Heidegger was not wrong
in asserting that Christians cannot participate in the philosophical
adventure of asking seriously the question of God’s existence, for they
cannot doubt God’s existence even purely methodically. Of course, this fact
provokes the supercilious reaction of Heidegger against the fideism of
Christians and against the radical, insurmountable limitation of Christians
as philosophers.

      Do we, Christians, have an answer to Heidegger’s charges? I think so.
In order to show it I’ll develop what I said in “(99-nov-1" concerning
Barth et la connaissance de Dieu.

      The philosophical tradition that comes to maturity with Plato is, in
its first moment, essentially reflective, for its purpose is to criticize
what is taken for knowledge in order to find out whether it is genuine or
merely apparent knowledge. In its second moment, that is,
insofar as the philosopher is going to contribute new knowledge and not
merely to discern what is genuine and what is apparent knowledge in what
others have contributed, the philosophical tradition aims at the universal
over the particular and at the necessary over the contingent, which are the
two traits that it finds lacking in the common “opinions.” Now, because the
philosophical tradition is critical, it begins on the level of immanence,
that is, on the level of the subjectivity of the thinking subject, for,
initially at least, it cannot take anything for objective or genuinely
known. By the same token, the philosophical tradition is essentially
contemplative rather than participatory. That is, it automatically converts



