---
title: "2001-jan-1"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/2001/2001-jan-1.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---


2001-jan-1                                         January 5, 2001

    THE LATE APPEARANCE OF PRACTICAL KNOWLEDGE AS KNOWLEDGE

      The Western philosophical tradition is characterized by being
      reflective. That is, it represents the thinking, not of the exposed
      agent actually involved in interaction with the surrounding world, but
      the thinking of a curious observer withdrawn from interaction,
      interested in understanding knowledge. Therefore this tradition
      reduces the object –what it conceives as the real, what is the case–
      to object of observation to be understood from the observing
      philosopher’s point of view. By the same token it sees the exposed,
      vulnerable interacting agent to a neutral, objective observer and
      subordinates action to vision or knowledge, without realizing with
      Hume that no factual state of affairs can motivate this contemplated-
      contemplator to act (Monasterio).

      “... in some cases, this discovery of alternatives has been taken for
      an argument in favor of a kind of philosophical relativism, or at
      least a view which might be labelled a species of non-realism,
      according to which reason cannot arbitrate between the alternatives..
      Professor Rorty seems to defend a view of this kind... Now, I think
      there is something deeply mistaken about this non-realist view. It
      misses the whole point of what we have learned through our challenge
      to the epistemolgical model. It is not just that the notion of truth,
      of faithfulness to reality, does not need to be construed on a
      correspondence model. More fundamentally, it is that the very nature
      of the discourse whereby we escape the epistemological prison, for
      instance, is misunderstood if we make this non realist move... - The
      point is that the debate is not between two propositions which are
      rivals in the ordinary way that empirical hypotheses are –say, the big
      bang versus the steady state cosmologies... - To treat them as rival
      hypotheses which one cannot arbitrate between by reason is really to
      fall back into the epistemological perspective... which tends to make
      us see all knowledge claims as touching a realm of entities beyond our
      representations; which in turn forces the famous moves: to scepticism,
      or some distinction between the transcendental and the empirical, or
      some reduction of the issue of truth to what works... All these moves
      only made sense within the epistemological paradigm... - But an even
      more important point arises out of this analysis concerning the limits
      of philosophical reason. We are not condemned to agnosticism between
      these two construals of mind-in-the-world; indeed, we cannot be
      undecided once we understand what is at stake...... But seeing these
      limits of philosophical reason points to another way of identifying
      the error in philosophical non-realism... Pure philosophical non-
      realism would make sense only for a subject who was thoroughly
      disengaged, who was equidistant from all cultures. A picture of the
      subject as disengaged, is, of course, another notion generated by the
      epistemological tradition” (Charles Taylor, “Philosophy and its
      History,” in Philosophy in History: Essays on the Historiography of
      Philosophy, Edited by Richard Rorty, J.B/. Schneewidn,, Quentin
      Skinner, pp. 28-30).
      The Post-moderns have given up on presence, that is, on knowledge and
truth, because there is no possible correspondence between what the subject
knows and what is the case. From that they draw relativism or skepticism as
a conclusion. Threatened by such  conclusion, certain people, particularly
Christians who have a particularly important stake in the issues of
skepticism and of truth (the Vatican’s official line with its constant
criticism of modern relativism constitutes an outstanding example of the
attitude I am talking about) oppose the post-moderns by defending the human
mind’s capacity to represent reality objectively and grasp the correctness
of the representation. A hopeless defense, in my opinion. Yet, within the
assumptions shared by both parties concerning knowledge as representational
and the relationship of the subject to the world, it has indeed to be a
matter of either-or between two alternatives: either epistemic relativism,
or objectivism.

      How come, however, that such declared enemies share the same
assumptions? And which, precisely, are the assumptions they share? And why,
precisely do they share these
assumptions rather than any others? And why these assumptions are made  so
spontaneously, to the point of appearing natural and inescapable? And are
they, in fact natural and inescapable? And, if they are not, what changes
take place as a result of escaping them? These is the cluster of questions
I’ll be dealing with here.

      My basic hunch is that at the origin of these assumptions, which in
the Western world have come to constitute the traditional intellectual
“paradigm, is the combination of a commonsensical conception of knowledge
as a visual reproduction of reality with its unwitting adoption and
official consecration by the Greek  philosophers, particularly Plato and
Aristotle. The aura of naturalness and, therefore, of inescapableness of
the paradigm arises from this alliance of common sense with the impressive
intellectual sophistication of the Greek philosophers and the long list of
their intellectually brilliant successors that recommend it to us.

      Far from being adequate, however, the paradigm has always proven
unsatisfactory. Hence the series of modifications it has undergone since
Plato introduced it, from Aristotle through Kant and beyond. What
characterizes post-modernity is the full realization of the insufficiency
of the paradigm, but without the abandonment of it for lack of a viable
alternative. Hence the more or less avowed relativism or even full-fledged
skepticism of the post-moderns, as well as the stubborn dogmatism of those
who refuse to give up on the paradigm in spite of its obvious inadequacy
for lack of an acceptable alternative.

      I want to work on my hunch in the hope that a viable alternative to
relativism and objectivism, to use Richard Bernstein’s characterization of
the current alternatives, will emerge from this examination.

Plato and Aristotle on knowledge

      . There is no way to understand Aristotle’s views but by contrast to
those of  Plato, for Aristotle’s views are the result of a constant,
implicit dialogue with his master by contrast to whom he progressively
elaborates his own stances. As is often the case with disciples of great
talent, Aristotle began by adopting his master’s views and then he
progressively came to differ in significant respects. Today Aristotle’s
initial dependence on Plato as well as his progressive independence and his
originality are widely accepted.  Actually, the chronological order of
Aristotle’s works is usually established by observing the progress of his
differences with Plato.
However, the aspect of the relationship between Plato and Aristotle that
interests me here concerns their respective epistemologies. I will begin
with certain basic features of Plato’s views on knowledge in order to
determine the extent to which Aristotle accepts or rejects them..

      A first feature to be taken into account is Plato’s implicit
conception of knowledge as some kind of correspondence between the
subject’s knowledge and the reality known, Granted, Plato is very far from
Descartes’ definite subject-object. Indeed, the Cartesian project of the
epistemic reconstruction of reality from scratch would have been
incomprehensible, as would be Descartes’ withdrawal from reality to the
epistemic subject. By the same token, Plato’s view of the correspondence
with reality involved in knowledge will remain very vague compared to
Descartes’ own. Yet –and this is my point– there is no doubt that, for
Plato, knowledge consists in some kind of correspondence. Though never
explicitly defined as such , this correspondence,  in Plato’s case, seems
to consist in some kind of identity thanks to an intuitive contemplation of
what is.

      That Plato understands knowledge as correspondence is evident in his
most distinctive doctrine, namely, the doctrine of the Ideas. What, indeed,
forced Plato to move in such an outlandish direction and postulate the
existence of eternal ideas if not the need to furnish to our universal
statements a ‘reality’ that corresponded to them, without which
correspondence they would be object-less or referent-less and therefore
false? Moreover (and this will become clearer in a moment, when we deal
with Plato’s views on the  knowledge of particulars), the fact that the
Platonic Ideas were eternal and immutable insured that the knowledge the
philosopher has of them is necessarily true, without which necessity what
is taken for knowledge could conceivably be false and would amount to a
mere belief? In short, without the existence of the eternal Ideas no
knowledge would be valid, for it would lack the two requirements that Plato
considers essential, namely, correspondence with what is , and  necessary
correspondence.

      The knowledge of the intelligible Ideas was, of course, a deed of the
superior, spiritual component of the knower. Very different, however, in
Plato’s view, is the case of perceptual knowledge, for  the objects
perceived which are sensible rather than intelligible, and particular
rather than universals. In fact,  Plato found it impossible to justify the
validity of perceptual knowledge. Why? Precisely because knowledge requires
necessary correspondence with what is, and in the case of perception the
correspondence with the objects perceived cannot possible be  be
guaranteed, since particular objects are by their very nature temporal and
mutable. Hence, not only would the knowledge of sensible objects cease to
correspond to them as they changed, but, in addition, even assuming that  a
particular perception happened to correspond at least momentarily with the
object perceived, this correspondence wouldn’t be necessary, given the
contingent nature of the particular object. Hence the knower wouldn’t know
with certainty whether or not his or her perception was true, in which case
knowledge would be just an uncertain opinion or belief  rather than genuine
knowledge.

      To come now to Aristotle, most certainly, in the course of time, he
abandoned or modified many of Plato’s views. But the point that interests
us is whether, in his effort to improve on his master, Aristotle stopped
understanding knowledge as correspondence, in which case we will have to
find out the alternative he proposed.

      Now, to begin with the case of intellectual knowledge, it is true
that Aristotle gave up on the existence of the Platonic heaven of eternal
Ideas. But, as is well known, he substituted them with the actual existence
of the intelligible universal natures subsisting in the actually existing
particulars grasped through perception. And these natures, which
corresponded to our universal judgments, guaranteed the objectivity of
those judgments by being the real referent that corresponded to them and
insured their truth by making  the correspondence necessary. This is the
knowledge that, in its final elaboration, Aristotle called “scientific
knowledge” or “episteme,” characterized by universality and necessity,. by
contrast to the non-scientific knowledge of the perceptual order. Thus, for
all the avowedly significant ways in which Aristotle modified the Platonic
doctrine of the Ideas, he retained the conception of knowledge as
correspondence in the case of universal judgments, which is what interests
us here.

      As for the case of perceptual knowledge and the knowledge of
particulars, Aristotle’s views are more ambiguous and therefore more
difficult to summarize clearly. By contrast to Plato, for whom the
necessary truth of knowledge was what distinguished knowledge from mere
opinion or simple belief., which in its turn constrained him to reject or
at least render irremediably  suspect the validity of the knowledge of
particulars, Aristotle took for granted the possibility of perceptual
knowledge.






