---
title: "94-95"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/94-95"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

On Faith within the Limits of Caputo's Deconstructionism

Although Caputo's book Against Ethics is not about religion or religious issues, his radical deconstructionism has implications as to the viability of the Christian faith. Caputo, who after all, as he himself confesses, has "consorted in the past chiefly with mystics and saints," ^(E1)  is, of course, not blind to such implications. Actually, one of the things he sees himself doing in Against Ethics is "drawing the parameters within which faith can take place," given deconstructionism. ^(E2) Now, if I understand Caputo correctly, his conclusion seems to be (I say seems to be, because it is never explicitly stated) that the Christian faith remains a viable possibility within the limits of deconstructionism. For my part, I am convinced of the opposite. In other words, it is my opinion that one cannot, in all consistency, share Caputo's deconstructionist convictions and remain a Christian at the same time. Why this is so is the issue I want to explore in this paper.

A cautionary note, before coming to my subject. I happen not to be a deconstructionist. In this paper, however, I am not interested in evaluating deconstructionism, but in finding out whether there is room for the Christian faith within the constrains it imposes, as Caputo seems to claim. I will, therefore, take Caputo's deconstructionist convictions at their face value, regardless of whether or not I agree with them.

Caputo's deconstructionism

Deconstructionism is a fluid label. There seem to be as many varieties of deconstructionism as there are deconstructionists. Although Caputo himself openly and forcefully professes his allegiance to Derrida's brand of deconstructionism, I will deal exclusively with Caputo's own views as they are expressed in Against Ethics .

At the risk  of oversimplification, I will begin by a characterization of Caputo's deconstructionism.

A first fundamental trait is the conviction that language or textuality is inescapable. This implies, among other things, that the Greeks were wrong in presupposing the possibility of a non-linguistic, immediate contact of the knowing mind with reality. We have no other contact with reality than through language, and language does not deliver in presence that to which it refers; it only refers to it. This is not to say that language does not transcend itself toward something other than itself, for it does refer, but precisely because it just refers it does not deliver in presence. In Caputo's own words,  

"There is certainly something outside the text, something beyond phrases, something that is referred to. There must be, otherwise textuality would be a closed system, an internally coherent system, uninterrupted by anything else, anything alter --which would be to embrace everything that deconstruction resists. Derrida does not deny but delimits reference; what he denies is reference-without-difference. Without différance . ^(E3)

A second feature of Caputo's deconstructionism combines the fact that language refers with the way in which language refers, particularly in its truth-claiming forms, such as statements. Language refers in a distinctive, unique way, namely, by saying what it means. Thus, for instance, the sentence "The cup is on the table" refers by saying what it means, not just by pointing at the cup on the table, as an extended finger might do.

However, since language refers but does not deliver in presence that to which it refers, while saying nonetheless what it refers to, it follows that each text is an interpretation, as definite an interpretation as what it says. Furthermore, since textuality is inescapable, since delivering in presence rather than just referring is beyond the scope of language, no particular interpretation can justifiably claim to be true to the exclusion of all other interpretations. Hence Caputo's deconstructionist conviction

"that events are indefinitely rediscribable, indefinitely reconfigurable, that we lack the perspective from which to pronounce or pass the final judgment on the sense of events..." ^(E4)

At this point one might feel tempted to jump to the conclusion that Caputo's deconstructionism amounts to a variety of skepticism, which of course would make the Christian faith totally incompatible with deconstructionism. But that would be to forget that the language of deconstructionists also "refers with difference" and is also interpretive, so that each of Caputo's own deconstructionist professions is itself affected by the "almost" that qualifies so frequently his statements in Against Ethics . Rather, then, than affirming categorically that Caputo's deconstructionism amounts to a variety of skepticism we should say that it almost does, which is to say, though not categorically, that it is not quite a variety of skepticism. This may sound confusing to those of us who are not used to the intricacies of deconstructionism, but the fact is that Caputo is not a skeptic, as shown by the position he adopts concerning obligation.

Deconstructionism and obligation

We might get a more accurate understanding of the actual scope of Caputo's deconstructionism, and by the same token become better prepared to grasp the parameters he draws for faith, if we consider the particular way in which, in his own estimation, deconstructionism affects the field of ethics. The bluntness of the title of his book, Against Ethics , may at first sight suggest that Caputo has become an immoralist or at least an amoralist, thereby losing the good name he had acquired during his long past of consorting with mystics and saints. It turns out, however, that Caputo's stance against ethics is more qualified than his blunt title indicates. Yes, Caputo is radically opposed to ethics as "philosophy," as "a certain episteme ," ^(E5) that is, as a metaphysically grounded system of rules of conduct. And, yes, Caputo is now opposed even to the  Heideggerian "more primordial," "originary ethics" he had previously favored ^(E6), in which obligation somehow remained safe, though not really demonstrable. Now, if being against ethics in these two senses entails losing one's good name, then Caputo is willing to lose his good name and deserves to lose it . What cannot be fairly said, however, is that, as a result of the deconstruction of ethics which he endorses, Caputo has simply become an immoralist or an amoralist. On the contrary, he sees in the deconstruction of ethics that does away with ethics as philosophy and even with originary ethics the very condition for the visibility of obligation:     

"The deconstruction of ethics sets obligation loose from its containment or confinement or, better, lets that being-set-loose be seen, even as it exposes the vulnerability, the frailty and fragility of obligation. It lets obligation be even as it lets it in for trouble, exposing it to disaster." ^(E7)

And, indeed, Caputo claims, it is only after the deconstruction of ethics that obligation truly becomes visible, for it is only then that it appears in all its nakedness, in its scary fragility. Compared to the mythical solidity it seemed to possess before deconstruction, when it surged on grounds of necessity or at least as an evident reality, the status of obligation after deconstruction is avowedly vulnerable. For loosened from all rational foundations obligation floats, as it were, like a weightless, rootless gossamer come from nowhere. Yet it appears, it is visible. Caputo explains:

"By 'obligation' I do not mean anything profound... Obligation does not mean answering the call of Being, or of the History of Being, or of the History of Spirit, or of the voice of God... I have in mind instead a very earthbound signal, a superficial-horizontal communication between one human being and another... I mean the feeling that comes over us when others need our help, when they call for our help, or support, or freedom, or whatever they need, a feeling that grows in strength directly in proportion to the desperateness of the situation of the other." ^(E8)

In doing away with ethics, deconstruction creates the void in which obligation can become visible. The other needs our help. " Es gibt obligation," as Caputo repeats untiringly, using the German words (and some times the equivalent French words " Il y a ") to mark in some way the purely "factical," that is, not even factual, utterly surd, rationally ungrounded, unjustifiable character of obligation. There is obligation. That is all, and that is all one has to go on; the rest one has to invent through decision and action.

After deconstruction, then, one moves through unchartered lands in ethical matters, but not at random, not amorally, for es gibt obligation. Caputo waxes eloquent in his explanation of what deconstruction does and does not do:

"Deconstruction shows how a film of undecidability creeps quietly over the clarity of decisions, on cat-soft paws, clouding judgment just ever so much, so that we cannot quite make out the figures all around us. But do not be mistaken. Deconstruction offers no excuse not to act. Deconstruction does not put up a stop sign that brings action to a halt, to the full stop of indecision; rather, it installs a flashing yellow light, warning drivers who must in any case get where they are going to proceed with caution, for the way is not safe. Undecidability does not detract from the urgency of decision; it simply underlines its difficulty. Deconstruction takes as its subject matter the task of making one's way along an aporia, along an almost impassable road, where the ground may at any moment shift beneath our feet... Ethics, on the other hand, hands out maps which lead us to believe that the road is finished and there are superhighways along the way". ^(E9)

The road is "almost impassable," but not quite impassable. And, thus, Caputo's deconstructionism does not lead to amoralism, it only makes moral conduct more difficult. Cannot a parallel development take place after deconstruction in the terrain of  faith, so that instead of becoming impossible faith acquires its genuine visibility which was previously obscured?

Faith within the limits of deconstructionism

My impression is that the answer given by Caputo to the question I just raised is affirmative, for the following words seem to me to portray the kind of Christian faith that becomes visible within the deconstructionist parameters:

"Far be it from me to make trouble for religious faith, I who am a devoted admirer of Abraham... I am only trying to draw the parameters within which faith happens. A man or woman of faith is not one who knows nothing of the abyss but rather one who has looked down this abyss and construed it in terms of the traces and stirrings of a loving hand, who finds in the abyss of suffering an infinity, who sees the Other as the trace of the Infinite. Faith is a matter of a radical hermeneutics, an art of construing shadows, in the midst of what is happening. Faith is neither magic nor infuse knowledge that lifts one above the flux or above the limits of our mortality. Faith, on my view, is above all the hermeneia that Someone looks back at us from the abyss, that the spell of anonymity is broken by a Someone who stands with those who suffer, which is why the Exodus and the Crucifixion are central religious symbols. Faith does not, however, extinguish the abyss but constitutes a certain reading of the abyss, a hermeneutics of the abyss. Faith is not a way of escaping what happens, but a way of interpreting it and coming to grips with it." ^(E10)

Because textuality is inescapable as well in the field of faith as in any other, faith does not, and cannot, deliver its object in presence; it is only a hermeneia . The genuine believer is the one who, realizing that there is no ultimate justification for this hermeneia and that other interpretations are therefore viable, nevertheless adheres to, and lives by, the radically vulnerable hermeneia of faith.

As to the awareness on the believer's part of the equal viability of other interpretations, Caputo is highly explicit: "What haunts my days and disturbs my sleep is the thought of the anonymous, of cold lunar surfaces... I lie awake imagining a world that consists of nothing other than a certain cosmic rumble...

"My peace is disturbed by the mercilessness of a certain Nietzscheanism according to which there is no one there, nothing within or beyond the stars, no

Aristotelian gods inhabiting them and steering them  safely about the heavenly vault, nothing but the charging and the discharging of forces, firing and misfiring. Und nichts ausserdem! " ^(E11)

The intense pathos of this paragraph and the fact that Caputo speaks in the first person leads me to think that not only does Caputo deem faith, however open to disaster, to remain possible within the limits of deconstructionism, but that the hermeneia of faith actually is his own hermeneia , the one to which he himself adheres and by which he lives.

Had Caputo stopped at this point in his deconstructionist drawing of the parameters of faith, I would have said--speaking for myself as a Christian, though I am not sure that all Christians would endorse my position--that Caputo is right in thinking that faith remains possible within such parameters. After all (though this is not the place to fully develop this point), the notion that the Christian faith is self-sufficient so that it does not depend on the support of reason--of which Caputo's view of faith as a hermeneia is arguably a version--is profoundly traditional. Non enim intelligo ut credam sed credo ut intelligam . Even Thomas Aquinas, the great champion of reason, explicitly acknowledged, unanimous in this not only with Saint Anselm but with all his predecessors, that if reason could  support faith in certain areas, faith stood on its own and did not depend on that support. ^(E12)

In saying this I may seem to have granted to Caputo the very point which I was supposed to dispute, namely, his contention that the Christian faith is possible within the parameters of his deconstructionism. Caputo's deconstructionism, however, does not stop here; it imposes a further constraint that we still have to consider.

With Abraham or with Nietzsche?

Obligation, to whose reality Caputo is so deeply committed, is vulnerable to disaster because it itself is no more than a particular hermeneia , a text that may be superseded by other texts and on the validity of which we cannot pass final judgment. Nothing, indeed, not even the existence of obligation, escapes the hermeneutical circle:

"We cannot just avoid or simply step outside metaphysics, which would mean to step outside the logic and the ontologic of our grammar... To speak at all is to have recourse to a way of framing and phrasing, to fall back upon a way of dividing up and  parceling out, to mark the world up... and to stake it out in one ontocategorical way or another. That is unavoidable..." ^(E13)  

Thus, the point of deconstructionism is not to avoid the metaphysics that is unavoidable but to keep it at its minimum. In other words, a deconstructionist is committed to what Caputo calls "minimalism", which he characterizes as follows:             "You cannot avoid linking one event to another and that to another, ad infinitum --again and again, and in different ways, over and over. But in this minimalist metaphysics or quasi-philosophy  of events you will never come up with a Meta-event that organizes all other events, that puts them to rest, that arrests their play... I do not care if you call such a Meta-event ousia or eidos , Bewusstsein or Wille zur Macht , God or the gods, abba or Jahweh , the logos or the primordial Greek Beginning, pace Father Abraham and the prophets, pace Hegel and Heidegger and Greco-German philosophy. ^(E14)

Now, that the Christian faith can subsist within the parameters of Caputo's deconstructionism insofar as they demand that faith be taken as a particular 'factical,' vulnerable hermeneia , "a certain reading of the abyss," much as unfaith is a different reading of the abyss, I have already granted. But does not Caputo's minimalism restrain further the parameters of faith to the point of rendering the Christian faith impossible? In other words, is not the God of the Christian faith, the God of Jesus-Christ, what Caputo calls a "Meta-event," and, therefore, inadmissible as a hermeneia ? Caputo gives no direct answer to this question. However, I think that the reason why he parts way with Levinas concerning obligation gives us an important clue.

Caputo follows Levinas "when he says that obligation comes from 'I know not where," ^(E15) but not when Levinas sees in obligation a trace of God. Why?

"Unlike Levinas, whom I love very much but whom I am obliged to betray, I do not think that anything can 'deaden the heartrending bustling of il y a .' ... 'God' is not the 'apex of my vocabulary'... but another word that puzzles and disturbs my sleep. I am pursued by a more radical anarchy than Levinas's... to say that this trace is the trace of God, is not that to track this trace down, to catch up with it, to catch one's breath? That is too much for me... If he-- il , E.L.--'does not know from where' obligation comes, then why does he say a thing? Why does he say that it ( il ) is the trace of God? My meditations on il y a leave me in a permanently anarchic state, tormented by the truth of skepticism." ^(E16)

Rather than by the truth of skepticism in general, Caputo should say that he is tormented by the truth of religious skepticism and ultimately condemned to it. For if his minimalism forces him to dismiss as maximalist the hermeneia that sees obligation as the trace of God rather than as mere obligation, by the same token it will force him to dismiss as maximalist the reading of the abyss that "construe[s] it in terms of the traces and stirrings of a loving hand" rather than as mere abyss-- and nothing more !  

I therefore conclude that Caputo is confused if he really thinks that he is not making trouble for believers--for himself in the first place, if he is one of them--but just drawing the parameters of faith. For if the parameters are the ones drawn by him "with constant reference to deconstruction," then Abraham, whom he claims to admire so much, is out of limits. The only hermeneia that remains possible within those parameters is that "merciless... Nietzscheanism according to which there is no one there, nothing within or beyond the stars..., nothing but the charging and the discharging of forces, firing and misfiring. Und nichts ausserdem !" Nothing more! For anything more would violate Caputo's deconstructionist minimalism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

^(E1) Against Ethics : Contributions to a Poetics of Obligation with Constant Reference to Deconstruction (Indiana University Press, Bloomington and Indianapolis, 1993), p. 1. Hereafter AE.

^(E2) AE, p. 244.

^(E3) Ibid ., p. 76. The whole section, which ends on p. 79, deserves attentive reading and is a fine example of Caputo's articulateness.

^(E4) Ibid ., p. 221.

^(E5) Ibid ., p. 5.

^(E6) Ibid ., p. 2.

^(E7) Ibid ., p. 5.

^(E8) - Ibid ., p. 5.

^(E9) Ibid ., p. 4.

^(E10) Ibid ., p. 244-245.

^(E11) Ibid ., p. 245.

^(E12) I am not trying to equate Aquinas' with Caputo's position, but only to show that, up to this point and given a sympathetic reading, Caputo's view of faith as independent from rational foundations is compatible with the Christian tradition. For an interesting, detailed analysis of Aquinas' position in this connection see Nicholas Wolterstorff, "The Migration of the Theistic Arguments: From Natural Theology to Evidentialist Apologetics," in Rationality, Religious Belief, and Moral Commitment: New Essays on the Philosophy of Religion , edited by Robert Audi and William J. Wainwright (Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1986), pp. 38-81

^(E13) AE, pp. 220-221.

^(E14) Ibid ., p. 222.

^(E15) Ibid ., p. 225.

^(E16) Ibid ., pp. 225-226.
