---
title: "EXCORDE"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/2005/EXCORDE"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.0
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\chant\excorde

EX CORDE ECCLESIAE: REFLECTIONS OF A CATHOLIC

Whatever the intrinsic value of its content, one of the most disappointing aspects of Ex corde Ecclesiae as a document is its total lack of contextuality and historical perspective. From its official title, "Apostolic Constitution on Catholic Universities," the reader gathers that the document will deal with the Catholic university as an institution. Which are, however, the concrete circumstances that make it particularly appropriate or perhaps even imperative to speak today about the Catholic university, and how has the Catholic university come to find itself in those circumstances is not even hinted at.

Of course, it may be argued that an authoritative document of the character of Ex corde Ecclesiaea is not the appropriate place for historical considerations. The fact remains, nonetheless, that one ignores history at one's own peril, and this applies as well to ecclesiastical documents. In the particular case, the lack of contextuality and historical perspective has the disastrous effect of depriving its readers as well as its authors of the background by reference to which alone the content itself of the document can gain its full intelligibility and become or fail to become genuinely effective. I will therefore begin by providing a very rough sketch of the required historical backgroungd.

Historical background

Although never explicitly stated, Ex corde Ecclesiae is obviously meant to answer the following cluster of questions: Can a university be a genuine university and be genuinely Catholic at the same time? Are not these two terms--"university" and "Catholic" mutually exclusive? Is not "Catholic university" an oxymoron? As these questions are hardly new, it seems appropriate to ask why a document whose purpose is to answer them was deemed necessary precisely at this time. And, unless I am badly mistaken, the answer is that these questions, which for a long time did not represent a real problem for Catholics , have come to articulate what is for them a very real problem. But to understand this we need to go back a few centuries, to the time of the birth of the university.

In the first quarter of the thirteenth century, precisely at the time when universities were becoming an institution with a clearly distinctive character, the complex problem of the relationship between faith and reason began to emerge on the occasion of the rediscovery of the bulk of the Aristotelian works in the West. As we shall see in a moment, the particular solution given to the problem was going to determine the identity of the university for a long time. It took more than half a century for a definite solution to reach its final shape in the so-called "synthesis of faith and reason" usually attributed to Aquinas, to which Aquinas did indeed give its definitive articulation but many of whose features he received already made from his predecessors.

According to that view, both faith and reason are autonomous within their proper domain and, therefore, entitled and even required to follow their distinctive paths, faith obeying divine revelation and reason bending before evidence. In those matters, however, in which the domains of faith and of reason, so to say, touch each other, reason is supposed to submit itself to the sure guidance of faith. Indeed, since God is both the infallible and veracious author of revelation as well as the creator of human reason, neither can He reveal something false, nor can there be a contradiction between the truths revealed and the truths discovered through the right use of reason. Thus, if ever the conclusions of reason are at odds with revealed truth, the contradiction can be only apparent, will dissolve in time when reason's mistake becomes evident, and revealed truth will prevail.

For our purposes it is important to remark that in this view of the relationship between faith and reason not only is the notion of a Catholic university unproblematic but is actually presciptive. Indeed, faith and reason complete each other as sources of knowledge. A secular, non-confessional, non-Catholic university from which the domain of divinely revealed truth would be excluded would fail to its very institutional vocation to concern itself with the whole of truth, would be misled into taking the part for the whole, and even in the domain of the natural disciplines would deprive itself from the negative but necessary guidance of revelation.

It would be a serious mistake to consider this synthesis unassailable from the purely rational standpoint. In fact, not only can it be legitimately rejected by those who do not believe, since for them there is no need whatsoever to harmonize reason with faith, but the synthesis itself is such that it can be accepted as valid only by people of faith, since it presupposes that people assent to divine revelation and are willing to submit their reason to it whenever a conflict arises between the truths of reason and the truths of faith. The fact that this synthesis became generally accepted in the Western world in a relatively short time and remained undisputed for a long period was due, in the main,k to two factors. The first was that Western Europe, where the synthesis was elaborated and where all the important universities were situated, was a homogeneously Catholic region. The second was that for a relatively long period no significant conflicts between faith and reason arose to put the synthesis to the acid test of experience, because there were no experimental (rather than merely speculative) disciplines to speak of. Under those conditions, the text of the Bible furnished the undisputed horizon for thought. By the second half of the seventeenth century, though, with the incipient development of the experimental sciences, a view of the world radically at odds with the biblical conception of the universe began to take shape, and together with it a new awareness of the powers of reason and of the untenability of the traditional conception of the universe. There was, for the first time, real, serious tension between faith and reason, as well as a sense, at least among the non-clerical Catholic intelligensia, that the truths of science rather than the biblical truths until then identified with divine revelation were there to stay, contrary to the prediction of the medieval synthesis.  

The increasing confidence in the powers of reason and the correlative erosion of the confidence in faith reached the proportions of a genuine watershed in the eighteenth century--the age of reason, the century of the Enlightenment. Till then, it had generally been taken for granted that religion was to determine the limits of reason. Now, as Kant significantly put it, it was a matter of " Religion within the limits of reason ." In other words, the presuppositions on which the medieval synthesis of faith and reason rested had been inverted. Indeed, if one starts from the end of faith with the acceptance of divine revelation, as Aquinas and his predecessors did, then faith determines the boundaries within which reason can function autonomously and beyond which it is not meant to move. If, however, one starts from the other end, that is, from the end of reason, then it is the other way around, for reason prescribes that nothing can be accepted as true that does not live up to its own rational demands. Then, instead of reason within the limits of religion or revelation, it is a matter of religion within the limits of reason. And, then, automatically, the notion of a secular , religiously independent university becomes automatically prescriptive, whereas the notion of a Catholic university becomes not merely problematic but nonsensical. This, precisely, was the character of the shift of paradigms that the Enlightnment brought about. Thus, in Europe, where universities had originated as Catholic centers of learning under the Church's close supervision, a historical process of secularization took place all through the nineteenth century, which was virtually completed by the beginning of the twentieth century, with only a few genuinely confessional--mainly Catholic--universities left as odd relics of the past.

In the United States the process was not very different, with one significant exception. Indeed, the most distinguished universities, all of which had been originally Protestant and militantly confessional, were by the middle of the twentieth century already fully secularized, with no observable loss of their academic quality and prestige. The exception is constituted by the Catholic universities, which still in the last decennium of the century remain very numerous and have so far maintained their confessional identity, at least on paper. * How is this exception to be explained and interpreted?

For a variety of historical and sociological reasons which need not be explored here, till the middle of this century American Catholics lived for the most part in Catholic ghettos, culturally isolated from the outside world and with a strongly traditionalist, Church-controlled structure. Catholic universities--undergraduate colleges for the most part, which functioned more as instruments of Catholic acculturation than as centers of research--were part and parcel of the ghetto. In them, thanks to their isolation and as an element of their traditionalist structure, the medieval conception of the relationship of faith and reason remained operative and prevented Catholics from being intellectually challenged, much less threatened, by the profound cultural changes that had taken place in the Western world. After all, whenever reason was at odds with faith, the contradiction was due to the misuse of reason, the conflict was only apparent and temporary, and the truth of faith would ultimately prevail. However--and again due to multiple factors that need not be explored here, Vatican II occupying a significant place among them--the situation of Catholic universities changed radically  by the half of the century, when Catholic intellectuals awoke rather abruptly from their long dogmatic slumber.

Forty years or so later, American Catholic universities find themselves in a deep crisis. On the one hand, because of their still recent cultural past, they continue to depend for their self-interpretation as Catholic universities on the medieval understanding of the relationship between faith and reason and on the consequent notion of the university. On the other hand, the Enlightenment has finally caught up with them through their insertion in the American culture at large. As a result, they find themselves in a profound conflict of identity. Indeed, in order to remain Catholic otherwise than just in name a university has to restrain the academic freedom of its faculty and to interfere with the academic integrity of the disciplines. For if the teaching or the published research of the university's members happen to be at odds with the doctrines defined and the morals authoritatively prescribed by the Church--as it unavoidably happens if the faculty's academic freedom and the integrity of the disciplines is fully respected--then, by the terms of the traditional understanding of faith and reason, the university automatically ceases being Catholic otherwise than in mere name. And if, on the contrary, the autonomy of the academic disciplines is limited by extra-academic interests--as is necessarily the case if the Church's authority is allowed to predetermine what is to count as knowledge and to predefine the limits of competence of the academic disciplines--, then the university automatically ceases being a university otherwise than just in name.

Whatever the case may be with the Catholic universities of other parts of the world, as far as American Catholic universities are concerned this is the historical juncture at which Ex corde Ecclesiae appears. Naturally, the Catholic members of Catholic universities, or at least those Catholic members who have not completely given up the hope of finding a viable Catholic identity for their universities, expect from the document some significant help out of their apparently predicament. What do they get?

The Church's response to the crisis

Since the Constitution avoids identifying the problems that prompted its publication and which it wants to meet, it can be read in different ways. One of them, however, and for us the interesting one, is that the Constituion is trying to answer the question whether a university can be Catholic without ceasing to be a university. Now, since this question boils down concretely to whether a university can remain Catholic while respecting the academic freedom of its members and the academic integrity of the disciplines, we will read the definition of the identity of the Catholic university from this particular angle. Can, then,  Catholic universities, according to Ex corde Ecclesiae ,  remain genuinely Catholic while respecting the academic freedom of its members and the academic integrity of the disciplines?  

Most unfortunately, the document uses a highly ambiguous language in its answer to this fundamental question. For, while it begins with a language sounds as if the Catholic university were an institution in which the academic disciplines are autonomous and the members of the university enjoy academic freedom (what in a moment I will present under the name of "Description A"), the qualifications added when it is a matter of explaining that autonomy and that freedom amount to denying that there is room for them in a genuinely Catholic university ("Description B"). To make my point as graphic as possible, let me quote the document itself.

Description A : "It is the honor and responsibility of a Catholic university to consecrate itself without reserve to the cause of truth" (# 4). "... a Catholic university is distinguished by its free search for the whole truth about nature, man and God" (ibid.; my emphasis). "... by its Catholic character, a university is made more capable [than its not Catholic counterparts?] of conducting an impartial search for truth, a search that is neither subordinated to nor conditioned by particular interests of any kind " (# 7; my emphasis). "A Catholic university, therefore, is a place of research, where scholars scrutinize reality with the methods proper to each academic discipline, and so contribute to the treasure of human knowledge" (14).     

From this description one would seem entitled to gather that in terms of academic freedom and of the academic integrity of the disciplines there is no fundamental difference between a Catholic and a non-Catholic university, since the former no less--perhaps even more--than the latter encourages its members to engage in a free search for truth in all possible domains of knowledge, and guarantees its members conditions of impartiality so that they may pursue their search in full autonomy, without fear of interference by any other heterogeneous interests and according to the methods proper to their specific academic disciplines.

Alas!, when one reads the fine printing one realizes that the document also contains a second and very different description of the Catholic university.

Description B : "Because knowledge is meant to serve the human person, research in a Catholic university is always carried out with a concern for the ethical and moral implications both of its methods and of its discoveries. This concern, while it must be present in all research, is particularly important in the areas of science and technology" (# 18). So, after all, the search for knowledge in a Catholic university is not impartial and for its own sake, as we had been told, but is subordinated to the service of the human person. Consequently, both  its methods and its conclusions are subordinated to morality. As to the ultimate norm by which the appropriatness of the methods and the validity of the conclusions of the search for knowledge are to be determined in Castholic universities, the document leaves no doubt, for it bluntly affirms the institutional subordination of the Catholic university to the Church's authority: "One consequence of its essential relationship to the Church is that the institutional fidelity of the university to the Christian message includes a recognition of and adherence to the teaching authority of the Church in matters of faith and morals" (# 28). What, then, about academic freedom and about the autonomy of the academic disciplines? "The Church, accepting 'the legitimate autonomy of the human culture and especially of the sciences,' recognizes the academic freedom of scholars in each discipline in accordance with its own principles and proper methods, and within the confines of the truth and the common good " (# 20). And how are the confines of truth determined? By their coherence with the Catholic faith as interpreted by the Church: "... methodical research within every branch of learning, when  carried out in a truly scientific manner and in accord with moral norms, can never truly conflict with faith " (# 17). Naturally, what applies to research within every branch of knowledge, applies to theology in the first palce:  "Theologians enjoy this same freedom as long as they are faithful to these principles and methods... it is intrinsic to the principles and methods of their discipline that theologians respect the authority of the bishops, and assent to Catholic doctrine according to the degree of authority with which it is taught" ( # 29).  

This is baffling. The Constitution explicitly and repeatedly affirms its wholehearted support of the impartial search for truth (cf above, # 5 and 7) But how can the Constitution make of impartiality the condition of the search for truth and the guarantee of the validity of the results of the search, so that what is assented to is assented to solely by virtue of its objectivity rather than of subjective interests and, at the same time, demand the recognition of and assentful adherence to the teaching of the Church in matters of faith and morals? And how can it acknowledge and encourage the autonomy of the academic disciplines, while systematically limiting that autonomy?

  

I

The rationale for freedom and autonomy

Why are academic freedom and academic autonomy deemed to be essential to the university? To understand this we need to move back in time.

The unrestrained allegiance to academic freedom and academic autonomy is often traced back to the Enlightenment. If by this attribution is meant that the Enlightenment resolutely enshrined these notions as supreme and imperative, something which had not been the case in the past, the attribution is correct. The Enlightenment, however, did not invent these notions; it received them uncritically from the European Catholic past, implicated in the conception of the two sources of knowledge--revelation and reason--created by the medievals in response to the crisis provoked by the rediscovery of the bulk of Aristotle's works.

If the Enlightenment sacralized these notions, this was due to the conflictive way in which it received them, which practically forced the Enlightenment to choose between revelation and reason as sources of knowledge . This was the undisputed assumption.

Sources of knoweldge. What does that mean? Knowledge, for Aris, is in the mind and, concretely, in the judging mind, that is, in the mind that makes a judgment and thereby commits itself to its truth. This commitment, however, is not blind; it results from a certain grasping of the object, namely, grasping that the object is as judged. From such grasping the judgment itself results by which the judging mind commits itself to the truth of its judgment. And such grasping occurs when the mind grasps that the object itself furnishes sufficient reason to judge it to be such. When, in addition, in the case of judgments of essence rather than of judgments of fact, the object furnishes not only sufficient but necessary reason to judge it to be such by virtue of its nature, the knowlege obtained through the judgment and expressed in a statement aobut the object is not only true but necessarily so, which is what Aristotle calls episteme .

The judgment is an act of the intellect which results from understanding (grasping intellectually, seeing a reason) that there is sufficient reason for affirming or denying that the object is such. Since animals do not judge, they do not know. Yet they do not act blindly, at least not always, for though they do not judge, they do perceive. Which is to say that in animals a given perception does not lead to judgment but to action in response to the object as judged.  

The Constitution and the Medieval Synthesis

It surprised me to see how clearly underpinned it was by the famous synthesis between faith and reason that, rightly or wrongly, is attributed to Thomas Aquinas, whose main points are the following:

-   The truth is one : "There is only one culture: that of man, by man and for man. And thanks to her Catholic universities and their humanistic and scientific inheritance, the Church, expert in humanity..., explores the mysteries of humanity and of the world, clarifying them in the light of Revelation. It is the honor and responsibility of a Catholic university to consecrate itself without reserve to the cause of truth" (# 3 and 4)          " Integration of knowledge is a process, one which always remains incomplete... But a university, and especially a Catholic university, ' has to be a living union of idividual organisms dedicated to the search for truth... It is necessary to work toward a higher synthesis of knowledge , in which alone lies the possibility of satisfying that thirst for truth which is profoundly inscribed in the heart of the human person'" (# 16).

- There is no possible conflict between the truths of faith and the truths of reason : "While each academic discipline retains its own integrity and has its own methods, this dialogue demonstrates that 'methodical research within every branch of learning when carried out in a truly scientific manner and in accord with moral norms, can never truly conflict with faith. For the things of the earth and the concerns of faith derive from the same God " (# 17). "It is in the context of the IMPARTIAL SEARCH FOR TRUTH that the relationship between faith and reason is brought to light and meaning. The invitation of St. Augustine, 'Intellege ut credas; crede ut intellegas,' is relevant to Catholic universities that are called to explore courageously the riches of Revelation and of nature so that the united endeavor of intelligence and faith will enable people to come to the full measure of their humanity..."

Being inspired by the medieval synthesis of reason and  faith, the Constitution naturally reflects the underlying assumptions of such synthesis copncerning reason and faith. Faith and reason are complementary in their results because both of them lead to knowledge, which consists in assentful judgment, though in the case of faith the assent is based on divine authority and in the case of reason on the object's evidence to the exclusion of all extraneous interests. Hence, in that universities pursue the truth according to the demands of reason,

impartiality in their search is an absolute requirement . This the Constitution repeatedly acknowledges.

"Such renewal requires a clear awareness that, BY ITS CATHOLIC CHARACTER, A UNIVERSITY IS MADE MORE CAPABLE OF CONDUCTING AN IMPARTIAL SEARCH FOR TRUTH, A SEARCH THAT IS NEITHER SUBORDINATED TO NOR CONDITIONED BY PARTICULAR INTERESTS OF ANY KIND" (# 10).

What is the purport of these words? One would think that the document is categorically affirming that a Catholic university is at least as impartial as a non-confessional university , that is, that it offers its members at least the same opportunity as a non-confessional university to be primarily guided by the disinterested desire to know and, thus, to pursue the knowledge of their subject-matter under no other constraints than those dictated by the nature of their subject-matter. This amounts to answering with a categorical "No" the question whether the autonomy of the disciplines is more endangered in Catholic universities or less likely to be safeguarded. The suspicion, therefore, under which Catholic universities are held by its members is allayed. Since truth is what is (at least potentially) to be assented to by all minds  by virtue of its own irrecusable persuasiveness--a presupposition which is not made explicit in the Constitution but that clearly underlies its views concerning IMPARTIALITY-- , it has to be looked for impartially, without preconceived ideas and partisan interests, respecting only the methods that the nature of the specific object of each discipline dictates . The Church, therefore, willingly commits itself to respect the PROPER AUTONOMY of each and every discipline: "The Church, accepting the 'legitimate autonomy of human culture and especially of the sciences,' recognizes the academic freedom of scholars in each discipline in accordance with its own principles and proper methods, and within the confines of the truth and the common good " (# 29). "A Catholic university is distinguished by its free search for the whole truth about nature, man and God" (# 4).

One of the distinctive features of a Catholic university is that it concerns itself with the whole truth, both divinely revealed and humanly discovered, and aims at a superior synthesis of the entire truth. In this endeavor theology plays an essential role: "Theology plays a particularly important role in the search for a synthesis of knowledge as well as in the dialogue between faith and reason. It serves all other disciplines in their search for meaning , not only by helping them to investigate how their discoveries will affect individuals and society but also by bringing a perspective and an orientation not contained within their methodologies " (# 19). As for the freedom or autonomy accorded to theology by the Church, "It [theology] has proper principles and methods which define it as a branch of knowledge. Theologians enjoy this same freedom [as scholars in each discipline]" so long as they are faithful to these principles and methods" (# 29). These principles and methods are identified in the same paragraph (cf. quotation infra), coincide with those enunciated in the thirteenth century, and are REFLECTED IN THE LIMITS TO NEUTRALITY AND FREEDOM SPECIFIED IN THE CONSTITUTION.

What distinguishes Catholic universities from others?

"Without in any way neglecting the acquisition of useful knowledge, a Catholic university is distinguished by its true search for the whole truth about nature, man and God ... By means of a kind of universal humanism a Catholic university is completely dedicated to the research of all aspects of truth in their essential connection with the Supreme Truth, who is God ." ((#4).  (# 5).

A particular and particularly important contribution of Catholic universities concerns "meaning." "Scientific and technological discoveries create an enormous economic and industrial growth, but they also inescapably require the correspondingly necessary search for meaning in order to guarantee that the new discoveries be used for the authentic good of individuals and of human society as a whole... a Catholic university is called in a particular way to respond to this need...  For 'what is at stake is the very meaning of scientific and technological research, of social life and culture, but, on an even more profound level, what is at stake is the very meaning of the human person .

One possible answer to the question of what is what distinguishes a Catholic university from others is: the search for the whole truth about nature, man and God. Indeed, every Catholic university "should have a faculty, or at least a chair, of theology" (# 16). There are, however, a number of secular universities that have comparable, if not larger and better equipped, faculties of theology.

Another answer is that Catholic universities, in addition, are expected to have a faculty or deparment of philosophy, and that these two faculties or departments together and in harmony with the other departments of the university, confer a special character to Catholic universities (# 18 and 20). To this may be added the concern of Catholic universities with "meaning" and ethical matters . Other universities, however, do have  a faculty of theology and of philosophy and might claim to be as concerned as Catholic universities with meaning and ethical matters.

The point I am aiming at is that, on the basis of the Apostolic Constitution, there really is no way to distinguish significantly a Catholic from a secular university without taking into account the role played in them--or at least expected by the document to be played in them--by the Catholic faith, and this at every level .

At the level of the whole institution: "Every Catholic university, without ceasing to be a university, has a relationship to the Church that is essential to its identity... One consequence of its essential relationship to the Church is that the institutional fidelity of the university to the Christian message includes a recognition of and adherence to the teaching authority of the Church in matters of faith and morals" (27).

At the level of theology as a discipline: "At the same time, since theology seeks an understanding of revealed truth whose authentic interpretation is entrusted to the bishops of the Church, it is intrinsic to the principles and methods of their research and teaching in their academic discipline that theologians respect the authority of the bishops and assent to Catholic doctrine according to the degree of authority with which it is taught" (# 29).

At the level of 'ethical' research and teaching: "A specific priority is the need to examine and evaluate the predominant values and norms of society and culture in a Christian perspective [my emphasis], and the responsibility to try to communicate to society those ethical and religious principles which give full meaning to human life . In this way a university can contribute further to the development of a true Christian anthropology, founded on the person of Christ, which will bring the dynamism of the creation and redemption  to bear on reality and on the correct solution to the problems of life. " (33).

Now, this may go very much against the grain of the wisdom prevailing in our times, which proclaims not only the autonomy of reason but its de iure exigency to pursue 'the truth' and make determinations about it according to its own objective or neutral standards,  but it can hardly be denied that it expresses the thought of the Constitution. Or does it? There are indeed reasons to hesitate. (Surprise, surprise!, for after all the Constitution invites Catholic universities to " have the courage to speak uncomfortable truths which do not please public opinion (# 33). ?  

It  would seem so--until one reads what we might call the small print of the document. In issues that touch to matters of faith and morals, that is, in those issues within their discipline with which the Church's magisterium has concerned itself, theologians have to respect the authority of the bishops and assent to Catholic doctrine according to the degree of authority with which it is taught" (#29). But this does not apply to theologians only. In issues related to "meaning" or to ethics, whatever the discipline, the Catholic practitioners of those disciplines are held to the same standard on the basis that "methodical research within every branch of learning, when carried out in a truly scientific manner and in accord with moral norms, can never truly conflict with faith. For the things of the earth and the concerns of faith derive from the same God" (#17). Even in the hard sciences, where one would expect no pressure or interference on their practitioners, " BECAUSE KNOWLEDGE IS MEANT TO SERVE THE HUMAN PERSON , research IN A CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY is always carried out with a concern for the ethical and moral implications both of its methods and its discoveries . This concern, while it must be present in all research, is particularly important in the areas of science and technology" (#18). In summary: "THE CHURCH, ACCEPTING THE LEGITIMATE AUTONOMY OF HUMAN CULTURE AND ESPECIALLY OF THE SCIENCES,' recognizes the academic freedom of scholars in each discipline in accordance with its own principles and proper methods, and within the confines of the truth and the common good . Theology has its legitimate place in the university alongside other disciplines. It has propre principles and methods which define it as a branch of knowledge. Theologians enjoy this same freedom so long as they are faithful to these principles and methods ... it is intrinsic to the principles and methods of their research and teaching in their academic discipline that theologians respect the authority of the bishops, and assent to Catholic doctrine according to the degree of authority with which it is tkaught" (#29).

What remains of the autonomy of the disciplines that seems to be implied in the declaration of respect of "the legitimate autonomy of the human culture, and especially of the sciences" ? That, when all is said and done, their autonomy will not be respected in Catholic universities. What the document is actually saying concerning the autonomy and academic integrity of the disciplines is something like this: All disciplines in Catholic universities are autonomous insofar as and within the limits within which I, the Church's authoritative Magisterium,  recognize the legitimacy of their autonomy and allow them to be autonomous. Such declaration, of course, sounds ludicrous. In the first place, because IT IS OF THE NATURE OF THAT WHICH IS AUTONOMOUS TO LEGISLATE ON THE LIMITS OF ITS OWN AUTONOMY. Secondly, because in the particular case of the academic disciplines their autonomy is defined by their very identity--the knowledge of its respective objects-- and to insure procedurally the accomplishment of their natural goal, namely, the obtention of knowledge, so that any extraneous consideration to limit their autonomy (such as the authority of the bishops, fidelity to the church, etc.) is radically inadmissible by those who perceive their identity in that way and so long as the identity of the disciplines is so perceived . Now, it happens to be the case that this is the way in which today, in the Western world at least, the identity of the academic disciplines and, consequently, the identity of universities, is generally perceived. The university is a privileged place in which all other intertests are subordinated to the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake, which is the only way in which the obtention of knowledge can be procedurally insured, insofar as the obtention of knowledge can be insured . Accordingly, each academic discipline is autonomous within the field of its subject-matter and should pursue knowledge according exclusively to the dictates of the nature of its object .

Now, the document seems to grant the underlying principle, since it affirms the autonomy of the disciplines and presents the Catholic university as the place where, more and better than anywhere else, the conditions for the "impartial search for truth" (#7) are present, because it "consecrate[s] itself without reserve to the cause of truth," and "is distinguished by its free search for the whole truth about nature, man and God" (#4).

Insofar as it grants the underlying principle, it implicitly adopts the understanding of the university and of the academic disciplines that underlies it . Yet, in the fine print, the document contradicts itself by actually demanding the "institutional fidelity of the university to the Christian message, [which] includes a recognition of and adherence to the teaching authority of the Church in matters of faith and morals"

(#27).

N ow, the two positions adopted by the document are incompatible with each other . Either the today prevailing view of the university and of the academic disciplines is correct and accepted by the Church, in which case the demand for autonomy and freedom are justified and to be respected by the Church as much as by any other body, or the prevailing view of the university and of the academic disciplines is incorrect, and should not be accepted by the Church at all . WHICH OF THE TWO IS THE CHURCH TO CHOOSE?

II

Opting for practical knowledge

In fact, when all is said and done, the document opts for rejecting the prevailing view of the university and of the academic disciplines, since in practice it demands the institutional commitment of the Catholic university and limits the autonomy of the disciplines. And what counts is the practice. Unfortunately, this is double talk at its worse, for the same document acknowledges in theory the idea of the university and of the acdemic disciplines by which the modern, non-religious university is inspired. This double-talk can only have disastrous effects, for it will please nobody and will offend everybody by what cannot be but seen as the lack of epistemic sophistication on the Church's part, at best, or as the guilefulness of the Church, at worst. In fact it is mere intellectual confusion. For the fact is that the document itself appeals, however obscurely, to a very different conception of the university and of the disciplines within the university when it declares that "knowledge is meant to serve the human person" (#18). Indeed, this statement constitutes an alternative to the view that knowledge is genuine knowledge and can be acknowledged as such only when it is pursued for its own sake, for this statement amounts to affirming that knowledge is genuine knowledge and can be acknowledged as such only when it is subordinated to the interests of the human person. Or, if preferred, that the today's prevailing conception of knowledge and the university presuppose a notion of the person (the Greek, contemplative notion), whereas the policy practically adopted by the document presupposes a different, richer, potentially more persuasive notion of the person (the practico-Christian one, which of course as 'Christian' is more persuasive only within faith, but as 'practical' is potentially more persuasive universally).

The impartial search for truth

The impartiality-freedom portion of the Constitution

corresponds to a particular view of the object of knowledge and of the knower close to what the Greeks and the medievals called

speculative knowledge, whereas the Catholic-commited portion corresponds to a very differet view of knowledge close to what the Greeks and the medievals called practical knowledge. (I say close to, rather than identical with, because it is not clear that they quite got rid of the prejudice that practical knowledge still involved a separation of knowing from action or practice and a certain primacy of knowing over action or practice).

Let us start with the former--the impartiality view.

At least since the Enlightenment, the university is commonly conceived as being essentially an institution of learning in which, accordingly, everything is ultimately subordinated to the pursuit, the acquisition and the dissemination of knowledge. to the exclusion of all other interests that might copnflict with this goal. Academic freedom , that is, the guaranteed freedom of the university's members to pursue knowledge and to disseminate what accroding to the available evidence appears to be the truth without fear of retaliation, whichever the truth may be and however inconvenient to the interests of those for whom knowledge is not the highest value, as well as the autonomy of the the university to legislate itself in the pursuit and dissemination of knowledge, and of the practitioners of each of the disciplines within their particular field of expertise, are conditions without which the realization of the university's essential mission is impossible. Hence the uncompromising respect for those conditions reclaimed by modern universities.

How does the Constitution's conception of the university compare with the one just sketched? In its introductory section the Constitution seems to concur. Catholic universities, too, are characterized as being essentially institutions of learning, and if anything distinguishes them from other universities is their unrestrained pursuit of knowledge in all domains: "It is the honor and the responsibility of a Catholic university to consecrate itself without reserve to the cause of truth ... Without in any wkay neglecting the acquisition of uselful knowledge, a Catholic university is distinguished by its free search for the whole truth about nature, man and God... By its Catholic character, a university is made more capable of conducting an impartial search for truth, a s34earch that is neither subordinated to nor conditioned by particular interests of any kind " (nn. 4 and 7; my emphasis). Even the relationship between faith and reason is to be determined under conditions of impartiality rather than being subordinated to or conditioned by particular interests of any kind: "It is in the context of the impartial search for truth that the relationship between faith and reason is brought to light and meaning" (n. 5) 7).y the disinterested desire to know, to reach the truth. That the Constitution considers such impartiality a necessary condition for the acquisition of valid or true knowledge flows from the fact that it claims that "by its Catholic character, a university is made more capable of conducting an impartial search for truth" (# 7). Indeed, it is a claim of contemporary common wisdom that only research motivated and guided by the disinterested desire of knowing to the exclusion of any other desires or interests can lead to the truth, that is, to genuine knowledge. And the Constitution is here expressing its agreement with that claim as well as the conviction that the very fact that a university is Catholic makes it even more capable of such impartiality than its non-Catholic counterparts. Why the latter should be the case the Constitution does not explain. This is particularly bothersome, for the Constitution will subsequently make statements that are, at least at first sight, icompatible with the impartiality here claimed and implicitly accepted as necessary. For instance, it will declare that "the institutional fidelity of the [Catholic] university to the Christian message includes the recognition of and adherence to the teaching authority of the Church in matters of faith and morals" (# 27), that "it is intrinsic to the principles and methods of their research and teaching in their academic discipline that theologians respect the authority of the bishops, and assent to Catholic doctrine according to the degree of authority with which it is taught" (# 29), and that in a Catholic university "A specific priority is the need to examine and evaluate the predominant values and norms of modern society and culture in a Christian perspective, and the responsibility to try to communicate to society those ethical and religious principles which give full meaning to human life" (# 33).

Whether or not the these demands of allegiance are compatible with the claim of impartiality unfortunately is bound to remain in reasonable doubt, in the absence of explanation. As for myself, it is my honest opinion that that they are incompatible and, therefore, that the choice has to be made of one or the other. Modern universities have made their choice and defend and demand impartiality. Can and should the Church follow that model in Catholic universities? I do not think so.

Why have modern, post-Enlightenment universities opted for, and staunchly defended the impartiality of research? Their rationale for this was already expressed above in connection with academic freedom and the integrity of the academic disciplines. In both cases the argument presupposes that the appropriate attitude to reach genuine knowledge, that is, the truth, is impartiality. In other words, the disinterested desire to know must be primary and in any case exclude any other conflicting desires or interests that might prevent the object from showing itself as it is rather than as it is wished to be according to extraneous interests. We may ask, however, whether such notion of knowledge is the only conceivable one, and whether it can persuasively be considered the correct one in case an alternative arises.  

The conception of knowledge we are talking about separates knowledge from action as two entirely different, though not unrelated, things or realities. They are different in that one can know without acting and act without knowing. Yet, they are not unrelated, in that both intentional and systematically successful action is conditioned by knowledge. Thus, to allude to the first chapter of Augustine's Confessions , in this view one cannot praise God (which is an intentional, object-directed action) without knowing God, whereas one can conceivably know God without actually praising Him. Furthermore, only on the basis of knowing can one act successfully on a systematic basis . For instance, if I am walking blindfolded in an unfamiliar froom which has a door, I can once by chance pass through a door without hitting the wall, but it is on the basis of my seeing the door or knowing exactly where it is situated that I can systematically suceed in passing through the door without hitting the wall.

A further, important characteristic of this conception of knowledge is that it presupposes that knowledge is a matter of resemblance of what is in the knowing mind to the reality known, or--in another version of the same--of adaequatio of the knowing mind to the reality known.  The knowing mind is passive to the reality to be known--adaequatio mentis ad rem--, not the other way around. But to what aspect or 'formality' of the reality to be known is the mind passive in knowledge? Not to its goodness or badness, its attractiveness or repulsiveness to the subject, but only to what is objective, to what the object is in itself, to what in the object is capable of satisfying the subject's pure, disinterested desire to know. In other words, real or objective is what on the side of the object corresponds to the pure, disinterested desire to know on the side of the subject. This is why impartiality is essential for knowing, for any motivation other than the disinterested desire to know would distort the reality to be known to make it conformable to the subject's desires. Therefore the subject who pursues knowledge has to make a deliberate effort to hush or neutralize any interests or desires that would interfere with the disinterested desire to know.

To sum up this conception of the knower, of the object known, and of knowledge. Real or objective is what is to be known by a subject guided by the disinterested desire to know, that is, by an impartial knower who neutralizes all other desires and adequates itself passively to the purely objective aspects of its object. Knowledge is the result of this adaequatio mentis ad rem, and it makes possible the genuinely intentional and systematically successful action onf the agent. Does such a conception make sense?

It is noteworthy that, according to this conception, not only is knowledge different from action, but knowledge is in no case a sufficient condition for action. The reason is that there is nothing in knowledge capable by itself of motivating the knowing subject to act, for knowledge supposedly is purely objective, purely 'informative' about the object itself, purely revealing of the object itself independently from its goodnes or badness for the subject. Such knowledge finds its expression in the merely informative statement--what in his commentary on the Peri Hermeneias Aquinas calls "enunciativa oratio" "quae significat id quod mens de rebus concipit," "ipsum conceptum intellectus in quo est verum et falsum" by contrast to other "orationes" which "non significant ipsum conceptum intellectus in quo est verum et falsum sed quemdam ordinem ad hoc consequentem". The entire paragraph deserves quotation:

"Sed quia intellectus vel ratio non solum concipit in seipsum veritatem tantum, sed etiam ad ejus officium pertinet secundum suum conceptum alia dirigere et ordinare; ideo necesse fuit quod sicut per enunciativam orationem significatur ipse mentis conceptus, ita essent aliquae aliae orationes significantes ordinem rationis secundum quod alia diriguntur... Quia istae quatuor orationis species non significant ipsum concepeptum intellectus in quo est verum et falsum, sed quemdam ordinem ad hoc consequentem; inde est quod in nulla earum invenitur verum vel falsum, sed solum in enunciativa, quae significat id quod mens de rebus concipit... Aliae quatuor orationis species sunt relinquendae, quantum pertinet ad praesentem intentionem: quia earum consideratio convenientior est rhetoricae vel poeticae scientiae. Sed enunciativa oratio praesentis considerationis est. Cujus ratio est, quia consideratio hujus libri directe ordinatur ad scientiam demonstrativam, in qua animus hominis per rationem inducitur ad consentiendum vero ex his quae sunt propria rei , et ideo demonstrator non utitur ad suum finem nisi enunciativis orationibus significantibus res secundum quod earum veritas est in anima. Sed rhetor et poeta inducunt ad assentiendum ei quod intendunt, non solum per ea quae sunt propria rei, sed etiam per dispositiones audientis. Unde Rhetores et poetae plerumque movere auditores nituntur provocando eos ad aliquas passiones..." (In Pheriherm., I. I, c. IV, 1, 7. Quoted by Gagnebet, p. 228, note 3).

TRANSLATION (Jean T. Oesterle, Aristotle: On Interpretation. Commentary by St. Thomas and Cajetan (Peri Hermeneias) , Translated from the Latin. With an Introduction,

Marquette University Press, Milwakukee, Wisconsin, 1962, pp. 61-62):

"True or false is said to be in the enunciation as in a sign of true or false thought; but true or false is in the mind as in a subject (as said in VI Metaphysicae E, 4, 1027b 17-1028a 5) and in the thing as a cause (as said in the book Predicamentorum Categ. 5, 4a 35--4b 9)--for it is from the facts of the case, i.e., from a thing's being so or not being so, that speech is true or false.

"Next he shows that this definition differentiates the enunciation from other speech, when he says, Truth or falsity is not present in all speech however , etc. In the case of imperfect or incomplete speech it is clear that it does not signify true or false, since it does not make complete sense to the mind of the hearer and therefore does not completely express a judgment of reason in which the true or false consists. Having made this point, however, it must be noted that there are five species of perfect speech that are complete in meanining: enunciative, deprecative, imperative, interrogative, and vocative (... as in 'O good Peter!'). Of these species of speech the enunciative is the only one in which there is truth or falsity, for it alone signifies the conception of the intellect absolutely and it is in this that there is truth or falsity.

"But the intelect, or reason, does not just conceive the truth of a thing. It also belongs to its office to direct and order others in accordance with what it conceives. Therefore, besides enunciative speech, which signifies the concept of the mind, there had to be other kinds of speech to signify the order of reason by which others are directed. Now, one man is directed by the reason of another in regard to three things: first, to attend with his mind, and vocative speech relates to this; second, to respond with his voice, and interrogative speech relates to this; third, to execute a work, and in relation to this, imperative speech is used with regard to inferiors, deprecative with regard to superiors. Optative speech is reduced to the latter, for a man does not have the power to move a superior except by the expression of desire.

"These four  species of speech do not signify the  conception of the intellect in which there is truth or falsity, but a certain order following upon this. Consequently truth or falsity is not found in any of them, but only in enunciative speech, which signifies what the mind conceives from things. It follows that all the modes of speeech in which the true or false is found are contained under the enunciation, which some call indicative or suppositive.  The dubitative, it should be noted, is reduced to the interrogative, as the optative is to the deprecative.

"Then Aristotle says, Let us therefore consider enunciative speech , etc. Here he points out that only enunciative speech is to be treated; the other four species must be omitted as far as the present intention is concerned, because their investigation belongs rather to the sciences of rhetoric or poetics. Enunciative speech belongs to the present consideration and for the following reason: this book is ordered directly to demonstrative science, in which the mind of man  is led by an act of reasoning to assent to truth from those things that are proper to the thing; to this end the demonstrator uses only enunciative speech, which signifies things according as truth about them is in the mind. The rhetorician and the poet, on the other hand, induce assent to what they intend not only through what is proper to the thing but also through the dispositions of the hearer. Hence, rhetoricians and poets for the most part strive to move their auditors by arousing certain passions in them, as the Philosopher says in his Rhetorica (I, 2, 1356a 2, 1356a 14; III, 1, 1403b 12). This kind of speech, therefore, which is concerned with the ordination of the hearer toward something, belongs to the consideration of rhetoric or poetics by reason of its intent, but to the consideration ofthe grammarian as regards a suitable construction of sounds".

Knowledge, in the conception we are exploring, has a certain primacy over action in that it is said to be a necessary condition for action--but only for intentional action, for object-related action. And, as just explained, it never is a sufficient condition for action. Indeed, precisely because knowledge is purely objective, purely informative of what the object is in itself and independently of any relationship to the knowing subject, it has no motivating power. (This is what Hume noticed when he argued about the impossibility of passing from knowledge to action, from fact to value).

Now, if knowledge is not a sufficient condition for acting, what more and else is required for the subject to act? Attraction or repulsion. However, this attraction or repulsion cannot be a mere 'feeling,', it has to be intentional in the sense of object-directed, of being perfused with evaluative knowledge of object, for otherwise there would be no action in response to the object and the problem of the passage from fact to value would reappear: why would such a feeling (as a pure fact) motivate action anymore than the knowledge of the object? Thus, what is needed as a necessary--though perhaps not sufficient--condition for acting is knowledge of a different sort, namely, evaluative knowledge, knowledge that is not merely informative about the object in itself but about the object in relation to the subject, about the object in its capacity to affect the subject favorably or unfavorably. (THIS IS WHAT ARISTOTLE CALLED "PRACTICAL KNOWLEDGE"). AND, OBVIOUSLY, GIVEN THE INTRINSIC RELATIONSHIP OF THIS KNOWLEDGE TO THE GOOD OF THE SUBJECT , TO DEMAND THAT THIS KNOWLEDGE BE IMPARTIAL WOULD BE ABSURD. INDEED, THE DEMAND OF IMPARTIALITY MAKES SENSE ONLY IF KNOWLEDGE IS SUPPOSED TO BE PURELY OBJECTIVE, INFORMATIVE OF THE OBJECT AS IT IS IN ITSELF, NOT AS IT IS IN RELATIONSHIP TO THE GOOD OF THE SUBJECT. HENCE THE QUESTION BEFORE US IS WHETHER THE KNOWLEDGE PURSUED IN UNIVERSITIES (BE THEY CATHOLIC OR NOT), AND PARTICULARLY IN DEPARTMENTS OF THEOLOGY (AND PHILOSOPHY) IS THEORETICAL OR PRACTICAL. FOR IF IT HAPPENS TO BE PRACTICAL, IT CANNOT BE IMPARTIAL, IT HAS TO BE GUIDED BY THE GOOD OF THE SUBJECT.

Faith as knowledge

Faith, in a general way, is the ability to conduct oneself in the appropriate Christian way, that is, to respond to God and other people as a Christian in the concrete circumstances of the responder ought to respond. It is Christian faith because the central axis of the conduct, its motivating framework, so to say, is Jesus-Christ and His teaching (much as one would say that the central axis of the conduct of the protagonist of Kafka's The Castle is the Master of the castle). The more a life is structured around the Jesus-Christ axis, that is, the more the whole conduct of a person can be understood by reference to that motivating framework, the more it is Christian, the more it is the life of faith. The saints are the best of the faithful. In the Ancient Testament Abraham is the model, for his entire life was defined by obedience to God.

In relation to Jesus-Christ, faith is knowledge, for in a way Jesus-Christ is known. But what kind of knowledge?

Not theoretical knowledge . Theoretical knowledge is the knowledge of a pure contemplator of contemplated object, of an intelligent observer, not of an exposed subject. It is, therefore, purely objective, merely informative about the object itself. Furthermore, it abstracts the object from all relations and objectifies it, that is, considers it by itself, which amounts to conceptualizing it. By the same token, this conceptualized-known object demands no response on the knower's part, for neither is the knower exposed to it nor is an abstract, purely intelligible concept the sort of object that can motivate to respond. It is characteristic of theoretical knowledge to terminate in a judgment whose expression is a statement, a mere enunciation about the object.

Faith is both personal and affective. Insofar, therefore, as faith is knowledge, it has to be in one way or another personal and motivating knowledge. Personal not only in the sense that all knowledge is a subject's knowledge, for knowledge is not something that floats around by itself, but personal in the sense of a relationship of reciprocal exposure of the subject to the object and viceversa, which makes the knowledge affective.  

The reason that Catholic universities are "suspect" in this regard is a long history of which "Ex corde Ecclesiae" is only the latest episode.

attempt interpret themselves The Enlightenment has finally reached them and is already well entrenched within them under the guise of "academic freedom," which involves two undisputed claimns: the integrity of each academic discipline, which establishes the right of its practitioners to pursue knowledge in the domain of their discipline according to the method dictated by the nature of its object, without interference from any other interests, and the right of the faculty of the university to pursue their disciplinary research wherever it may lead and to publish and teach the conclusions reached whichever they may be , without fear of retaliation from those individuals or agencies to which their conclusions may be unpalatable. Needless to say, the acceptance of these rights amounts practically not only to the rejection of the authority of faith over reason, as these were conceived in the medieval synthesis, but to the subordination of faith to reason in matters of truth. Which amounts to saying that there is no possible harmony between faith and reason, that a choice has to be made between the two, and that in universities as institutions of learning there is no room for faith. In other words, the Apostolic Constitution Ex corde Ecclesiae comes precisely at the moment in which the Enlightenment has already penetrated the last bastion of the old Catholic dispensation and is on the verge of consecrating forever the incompatibility between reaons and faith. Reason is in and faith is out.

The reason that the two terms seem to be mutually exclusive has to do with two features that most people today deem to be essential to the identity of the university and without which it cannot function as such, namely, academic freedom and the academic integrity of the disciplines (the autonomy of academia - of reason -of the academic disciplines) .  Roughly speaking, again, by the integrity of the academic disciplines is meant the autonomy of each of the scholarly domains. Concretely this amounts to the professional obligation of the practitioners of each of the disciplines to let themselves be primarily guided in their teaching and research by the disinterested desire to know, and .

Reflection on Ex Corde Ecclesiae

Although in a slightly different language, this document merely reaffirrms as prescriptive the  medieval position that has not worked in the past and that, if anything, has led to the erosion of the confidence in faith. In particular, (1) the truth is one, (2) no possible contradiction between faith and reason, (3) faith determines the limits within which reason is autonomous, (4) two sources of knowledge and truth.

Underlying assumptions: (1) knowledge is a property of the intellectual act of judgment is achieved through assent of the mind justified either by evidence or by God's authority, (2) knowledge consists in (intentional) conformity of the judging mind to reality, and (3) reality has priority over and is independent from action and desire--hence knowledge is the correlate of the disinterested desire to know.

The medieval synthesis of faith and reason

THE TRUTH IS ONE - There are two sources of knowledge and truth, namely, faith (revelation) and reason, but the order of knowledge and truth is one. This means that what is true according to reason cannot be false according to faith, and viceversa. Thus faith and reason complement each other as far as the knowledge of reality is concerned .

REVELATION IS CONCRETELY IDENTICAL WITH THE BIBLE. Thus there cannot be any contradiction between what the Bible states and what reason knows.

REVELATION CONVEYS DIVINE KNOWLEDGE, THAT IS, DIVINE STATEMENTS, SINCE KNOWLEDGE IS A PROPERTY OF JUDGMENTS-STATEMENTS. SINCE THE BIBLE IS DIVINE REVELATION, THE BIBLE IS MADE UP OF TRUE STATEMENTS. IN OTHER WORDS, IN ITS PRIMARY OR LITERAL SENSE, THROUGH THE BIBLE GOD STATES THAT... And, indeed, the Bible is used as an arsenal of divinely guaranteed statements to be believed.

THE ARISTOTELIAN WORKS, TOO, ARE MADE UP OF STATEMENTS, LIKE THE BIBLE. UNLIKE THE BIBLE, HOWEVER, which is authoritative, fundamentally narrative, and looks for response,the Aristotelian works are argumentative, and fundamentally explanatory or demonstrative, and look for assent. Let us consider this contrast between the Bible and Aristotle's works.

First of all, Aris does not care for singular facts or events, for his point is not establishing the reality of what for him are ephemeral objects or the truth of what for him are ephemeral judgments. What he wants is lasting realities and lasting, necessary truths.

........

"It is true that your house is burning." As Searle observes, this can be said appropriately only if someone has previously stated that your house is burning. In this sense, truth is a property of statements, which express judgments-that of the kind of "it is true that your house is burning." Judgments-that of this kind (COMMUNICATIVE SPEECH ACTS) are reflective acts based on reflectively grasped (explicitly justified) conformity of what is conceived by the subject to reality (SILENT NON-COMMUNICATIVE STATEMENTS = KNOWLEDGE). Thus, before being a COMMUNICATIVE statement [IT IS TRUE THAT YOUR HOUSE IS BURNING, THE KIND OF STATEMENT MADE IN PROFESSIONAL PAPERS SO THAT THE HEARERS ARE REFERRED TO THE BURNING HOUSE THROUGH ASSENT TO THE STATEMENT THAT YOUR HOUSE IS BURNING] your house is grasped and assented to as burning by the subject. House burning, therefore, as far as judgment is concerned, is mere object of assent, and truth consists in the conformity between the judgment and the reality judged by a subject voyeur . IN OTHER WORDS, THE SUBJECT SEES WHAT IS THE CASE (material truth of perception, even in animals): what is the case, then, is object of assent, not object for response. On the basis of this seen-assented to, when the evidence is explicitly acquired or reflectively verified as evidence, I communicate to others (judge) that your house is burning. If "it is true for me that your house is burning", I am referred to the house as real, that is, as object of assent . That is, a voyeur creates another voyeur.

The preceding paragraph has something to it but is muddled.

The point is that what I call "judgment-statement-that," which is reflective, is judgment of the truth of a previous judgment  (perhaps what Lonergan calls verbum mentis that predicates something of something). Thus, this kind of judgment is formally judgment of conformity of another judgment to reality, not directly judgment of reality. The judgment of reality is the non-reflective judgment, the inchoatus judgment. But this inchoatus judgment is judgment by exposed subject, practical judgment, applicative judgment. THE RADICAL MISTAKE is to take it for a theore6tical, merely predicative judgment, and hence to attempt to cash it cashed in terms of a fragment of a picture to be put together with, and completed by, other fragments to constitue a mosaic of the whole of reality, much as Aquinas thinks that faith and reason complete each other in their truths.

The fadt is that we are not inserted in the world as invulnerable, curious voyeurs but as vulnerable, exposed, concerned subjects. "Your house is burning" does not convey to me, its owner, a piece of neutral information about a visible phenomenon, but the terror of a great loss to be prevented if possible. To be prevented-GERUNDIVE, APPLICATIVE IKNOWLEDGE. Neither was my house burning, when you discovered it, a piece of neutral information for you, since you ran to let me know that fact. In short, because we are needful, exposed agents,   we perceive emotively and  applicatively . We do not go around registering facts, neutral pieces of information. Only when not constrained to act, when functioning in the 'scientific' gear, do we seem to accumulate pieces of information, but even these are accumulated as to be activated practically in the future. My house burning, under conditions of exposure, is not object of assent, but object for response, at the very least of emotive response when nothing is there to be done about preventing it. And so would it be for the Aris of the Rhetoric--THIS IS PRACTICAL REASON.

But how or why does Aris move from practical to theoretical reason, and why does he ultimately consider theoretical reason as at least de iure paradigmatic for knowledge?

For us, as for animals, objects--reality--are objects for response at the moment of exposure . [Objects for response are objects to be transcended in appropriate action (applicative knowledge). Like your mother is on the phone, like Christ is in the eucharist, like "Fire!"]. The fact, however, that WE ARE LINGUISTIC CREATURES gives us possibilities of communication and deliberation and action that animals do not possess. We can plan and invent (delayed) response, we can consider the object in itself (fall of bodies on inclined planes, which yields the basis of instrumental value for the exposed agent) to brace ourselves for action, we can exchange practical information (that is, information to be understood applicatively). But this linguistic structure of ours also makes possible gigantic epistemic mistakes when we become theoreticians of knowledge and, as reflectors, take our knowledge sedimented in statements for  picktures of reality and convert even the functioning subject-agent into contemplated object .

FOR WE REFLECT 'SCIENTIFICALLY' WHEN WE ARE NOT IMMEDIATELY EXPOSED, AND WE REFLECT NOT AS CONCERNED DELIBERATORS BUT AS CURIOUS KNOWERS. AND WHEN WE BUILD A THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE ON THIS BASIS, AS THE GREEKS DID, THEN WE ARE IN DEEP SPECULATIVE TROUBLE WITH PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS. FROM THIS RESULTS PURE OR THEORETICAL REASON, KWITH ITS IMPLICIT NOTION OF REALITY AS TO BE CONTEMPLATED AND OF KNOWLEDGE AS PICTURE OF REALITY, SO CLEARLY INCARNATED IN KANT'S FIRST CRITIQUE.

Actually, the temporal reality (truth?) of "Fire!," as far as the agent is concerned, is to be cashed in terms of affective response and action, not in terms of picture seen or of assent to the statement that there is fire. But this applicative cashing is a personal, LINGUISTICALLY INTRANSFERABLE deed of the linguistic agent who himself or herself furnishes his or her situation of exposure and his or her project, and this in terms of his or her self-understanding within the world (which is partially furnished by his or her culture) , as it was the case with the Orson Welles's people. Thus, what in the subject-agent is as to be activated at the time of exposure and is linguistically transferable appears as an 'objective' 'picture' of what is the case, though it is to be applicatively cashed . It is not a picture, since it does not function a pictures do, namely, as to be contemplated.

A couple of comparisons may be helpful. Perceiving food is not just perceiving something to be seen, but perceiving something-edible and edendum under the appropriate circumstances. In other words, angels cannot perceive food. Thus, habitually knowing food is not having a mental picture of food, but being habitually disposed to eat that under the appropriate circumstances, and to 'understand' that as edendum by other agents. And, of course, food can be known only by exposed agents who need to eat. Similarly, as understanding an order is intrinsically related to obeying or disobeying it, which is an action, so knowing something real is intrinsically related to responding to it appropriately--that is, given its affective and instrumental identity .

The illusion of imaginative or intellectual pictures (which arises out of the 'objectification' [that is, phenomenalization?] by the curious contemplator of what actually functions as object for response for the exposed subject. In other words, it arises out of contemplating and identifying as for-the-exposed-subject what is for-the-Other-as-contemplator-- think of Sartre ). Thus, the illusion of knowledge as imaginative or intellectual picture is unavoidable and insurmountable if one takes as paradigmatic and normative one's experience when one is not acting but reflecting as a curious knower. It is like assuming that a pair of glasses, as such, is an object whose proper intelligibility can be grasped by its sensible qualities without reference to its particular instrumentality. When this illusion becomes the basis for a theory of knowledge, the primacy of theoretical over practical reason--which really amounts to cutting the connection between cognition and action-passion becomes unavoidable.

[ Notice that a pair of glasses is something seen by others , but not something whose instrumental efficiency depends on its being seen, or is even an object to be seen, by the subject who uses it. [In fact, the pair of glasses functions very much as a certain part of the eye, whose defect it corrects. Now this part of the eye has its objective side, understood and manipulated by the physiologist, but is part of the eye-subject and is understood and manipulated by reference to the seeing subject]. A pair of glasses does not function as a pair of glasses when it is seen as an object by someone who does not wear it; it functions as a pair of glasses when it is not seen but worn as a self-extension by a subject who sees the world through it and can consequently act competently in response to the surroundig world. Thus, though a pair of glasses has an objective dimension for Others-contemplators (which in fact allows the physicist-phisiologist to construct the instrument called pair of glasses), it cannot be understood and designed but by subject-agents. In fact, it cannot even be understood at all, if by understanding we mean a purely theoretical or objective and ARTICULABLE understanding, PRECISELY BECAUSE IT IS NOT SOMETHING TO BE CONTEMPLATED BUT TO FUNCTION AS AN EXTENSION OF THE SUBJECT-AGENT.

Unfortunately, what the Greeks did was to develop an all-embracing, that is, purely objective theory of knowledge-- a systematic explanation of knowledge and its validity, as if knowledge were a thing, an object, rather than a living deed of the exposed subject. Consequently, they developed it not as the subject-agents who are knowing applicatively, but as objects who are contemplated (that is, known) by contemplators. In a way, this is like trying to understand a pair of glasses by seeing it rather than by wearing it and without any relation to what it makes possible for the wearer, by how it looks when seen rather than by what it allows the agent to do.

What the Greeks did will become more perspicuous if we consider what Descartes did , who only pushed the Greek direction to its ultimate consequences . Indeed, the Greeks saw knowledge as the mind becoming intentionally the known, and truth consisted in actual intentional conformity of the mind to reality. But this "intentional" amounts to "visual": the mind sees what is the case, becomes visually what is the case. All that Descartes added was the realization that there was a gap between the mind and the world, and that what the mind saw was its own thought, so that the conformity had to be a matter of resemblance of the mental picture to reality. Descartes came to this realization by placing himself explicitly in the reflective position of someone who is curious, that is, not in the position of somebody who perceives and is exposed to the perceived but in the position of sombody who attempt to understand his own perceiving and to judge of the truth of what he or she perceives. Indeed, by neutralizing all his cares and reducing his ties to the world to the disinterested desire to know, that is, to mere curiosity, Descartes reduced himself to an invulnerable contemplator related to the world as object of contemplation, as pure spectacle . And his theory of knowledge is built on that basis . Of course, only then, and only because he had modified what Husserl would call "the natural attitude" (which, pace Husserl, does not involve belief-that but practical exposure, which is imaginable but not visualizable ) could Descartes doubt the reality (that is, the correspondence of something in the world similar to what he had in his mind) of everything. He had reduced himself to a thinker thinking thoughts who does not know whether the thoughts resemble reality. He had cut the connection between knowing and acting, on the subject's side, and, on the object's side, he had cut the connection between appearing and acting on the subject.

Thus, this is what the Greeks did: their conception of reality, knowledge and truth was contemplative-curious and cut the connection between the knower and the agent, between the world seen and the world as object of exposure.

AND WHAT ABOUT PRACTICAL REASON AMONG THE GREEK PHILOSOPHERS?

For a number of reasons, the question can be asked profitably only about Artistotle, for Plato, following Socrates' lead, collapsed practical reason into theoretical reason.

Now, no doubt, Aristotle came close to becoming independent from Plato and redressing his mistake. ( De Motu Animalium, the Rhetoric , the Nicomachean Ethics , partly De Anima ). But he never completed his independence. He never gave up the works of theoretical reason, and specifically the Metaphysics , as his ultimate point of reference. The contemplation of the immutable essences, though not of the eternal ideas, remains the telos even in the Ethics , however precariously combined with the life of action.

Yet, he came close. The practical syllogism, underpinned by desire and need, is his way of substituting action for assent.

And deliberation introduces practical reason , a form of intentional action ( actus humanus ) of which animals are incapable. However, Aris did not undertake the debunking of theoretical reason and of "scientific knowledge," nor seems to have even suspected the need to debunk it. As a result, he bequeathed us, through the medievals, the philosophical mess in which we have been ever since.
