---
title: "96-APR-3-2"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1996/96-APR-3-2"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.0
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\chant\96-Apr-3 April 23, 96

FIDEISM AND SKEPTICISM

"The great educational advantages of studying philosophy at Catholic University over studying it at some secular institution of the day were three: Philosophy was studied as a living subject, not as a set of historical specimens . Philosophy was linked to its continental masters, not as a peculiarly Anglo-American discipline. Philosophy was oriented to theology, not cut off from its natural completion." (John T. Noonan, Jr., Medalist's Address: "My Philosophical Education," ACPA Proceedings 1995, American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly , Vol. LXIX, 1995, p. 31).  

Two points to be made here: (1) If the Enlightenment's standard of rationality is valid, then not only faith but also science is fideistic or irrational and, therefore, skepticism is in order. (2) But the Enlightenment's standard is not valid. It arises from the Greek misconception of the epistemic subject as a purely curious, invulnerable contemplator and, consequently, of what knowledge is and is for. The alternative to the Greek contemplator is the involved vulnerable agent.

Post-modernity and skepticism

Post-modernism is not only skeptical in religious matters but in all matters. The reason is that it remains subservient to the Greek model of the epistemic subject as a pure, invulnerable contemplator (of which the Enligthenement's standard of rationality is the ultimate result) rahter than an involved, vulnerable, desirous, needful agent. Christians--as philosophers, not as Christians--are in a comparable position to that of the Enlightenment. The difference is that Christians were colonized by the Greeks long before the Enlightenment, when it was still possible to be optimistic about reason (that is, the contemplative mind), whereas Post-modernism comes after the Enlightenment, when generalized skepticism is unavoidable, as long as no alternative is found to the Greek epistemic model.

The epistemic model involves a theory of the process of knowing (that begins either with one's own awarenes as a knower-knowing, or with a visualization-objectification of the knower as such, of the knower related to the object as knower) and a justificatory theory of what is known (that is with a general justification of what is seen or judged-stated by the knower).

The epistemic model presupposes either the knower and the known as seen and to be accounted for, or--when the philosopher becomes reflective, as in  Descartes' and Kant's cases--a contemplated object and a contemplating subject to be accounted for.
