---
title: "96-NOV-3"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1996/96-NOV-3.doc"
original_format: CDFV2 Microsoft Word
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: antiword
topics: []  # To be added
---



\wp\96\96-nov-3                         November 19, 96
                       RATIONALISM AND FIDEISM
      "Studium philosophiae  non  est  ad  hoc  quod  sciatur  quid  homines
      senserint, sed qualiter se habeat veritas rerum" (Aquinas,  De  caelo,
      I, lect. 22. Quoted by Van Steenberghen. La  Philo  au  XIIIe  siècle.
      Publications Universitaires, Louvain 1966, p. 384, note 74).

      "...'verbomotor' cultures, that is, cultures in  which...  courses  of
      action and attitudes toward  issues  depended  significantly  more  on
      effective  use  of  words,  and  thus  on   human   interaction,   and
      significantly less on non-verbal, often largely visual input from  the
      'objective 'world of things. Jossue  used  this  term  verbomoteur  to
      refer chiefly to ancient Hebrew and Aramaic and surrounding  cultures,
      which knew some writing but remained basically oral and  word-oriented
      in life-style rather than object-oriented."  (Walter Ong, Orality  and
      literacy: The Technologizing of the World, Routledge,
      London & New York,, 1982, p. 68).

      "Texts are things-like, immobilized in visual space, subject  to  what
      Goody calls 'backward scanning.'  Goody  shows  in  detail  how,  when
      anthropologists display on a  written  or  printed  surface  lists  of
      various items found in oral myths..., they actually deform the  mental
      world in which the myths have their own  existence.  The  satisfaction
      that myths provide is essentially not 'coherent'  in  a  tabular  way"
      (Ibid., pp. 99-100).

      "Chirographic cultures regard speech as  more  informational  than  do
      oral cultures, where speech is more performance-oriented..., a way  of
      doing something to someone." (Ibid., p. 177).

      "We were still in those years  of  the  late  forties  in  a  mode  of
      thinking about Catholicism, which focused on continuity with  medieval
      achievements and tended to see all modern developments as oppositional
      to the faith... We were quite sure, and our elders  encouraged  us  in
      the conviction, that by attempting a coherent and foolproof scholastic
      philosophical synthesis of our twentieth century lives and learning we
      were the hope of the future (p. 78).
      "The pattern of the liturgical year as a frame for contemporary lives,
      the importance of symbolic stories and actions, and the wealth of role
      models all fell into place, broadening my sense of what  theology  was
      and how it functioned, from the narrow constraints of  the  scholastic
      model... (p. 80).
      "The teaching of theology... took on  a  problem-solving  style...  It
      took on three-dimensional depth from the historical approach in  which
      the  shifting  of  perspectives  and  emphases,  the  raising  of  new
      questions through the  ages  and  consequent  changing  shape  of  the
      project, and the debates that shaped at various  times  in  the  past,
      became evident. With this, of course, came the  realization  that  all
      our theology is reflection on the praxis of our lives  as  Christians,
      and that all the official teaching of the Church is the product  of  a
      communal discernment of the appropriateness of what emerges  from  the
      theological reflection on experience" (p. 84).
      (Monika  K.  Hellwig,  "A  Catholic  Scholar's  Journey  through   the
      Twentieth Century," In Faith  and  the  Intellectual  Life:  Marianist
      Award Lectures).
      There is in Hellwig's lecture  an  implicit  criticism  of  scholastic
philosophy and theology as well as of the long, uncritical  subservience  to
scholasticism on the part oJune 12, 2008f an important  number  of  Catholic
intellectuals, preponderantly present in American  Catholic  colleges  until
the fifties.
       Her  main  criticism   concerns   the   a-historical   character   of
scholasticism.  A-historical,  that  is,  fixed  and   unchanging,   closed,
incapable of progress and adaptation. All  this  may  be  true,  but  it  is
obscure. And it doesn't explain why theology would  be  better  if  it  were
dramatic or 'storical' and included  role  models.  But  at  least  Hellwigh
dares to criticize scholasticism, though without mentioning Aquinas.
      My purpose is to attempt to put my finger more precisely than  Hellwig
on the fundamental deficiencies of scholasticism. As a convenient  approach,
I have chosen to deal with rationalism and fideism, for fideism is a  figure
that can appear only where its opposite,  rationalism-intellectualism  (with
its consequent exclusion of emotion as blind), is in place.
The Greek chirographic culture
       Concerned  as  he  was  with  truth,  Socrates  was  the   first   to
systematically objectify statements by isolating them from all other  speech
acts.  Objectification  of  this  type  is  typical  of   what   Ong   calls
chirographic or literate cultures  by  contrast  to  oral  cultures,  though
Socrates himself as a figure in the transition  of the  Greek  culture  from
one form to the other still carried out this objectification  orally  rather
than in writing. Socrates  made  the  people  he  wanted  to  examine  state
something. Socrates objectified the  statements  made  by  paying  exclusive
attention to the words, to what was stated, abstracting from the person  who
made the statement, from the circumstances in which the statement was  made,
and from the perlocutionary effects intended or expected by the speaker  and
by every competent speaker of the language. (These effects are  not  assent,
for speakers are not speculative theoreticians. Hence therje is no room  for
the notion  of  truth  as  resemblancke,  as  pictorial  correspondence,  as
representation  of  something  present.  For  the  point   is   application,
responding for the purpose of bringing about in the future  a  saktisfactory
situation,  a  state  of  affakirs  that  suits  somebody).   For  Socrates,
statements are predicative:  they  state  that  a  predicate  belongs  to  a
subject, is a characteristic of a subject. Socrates treated the  stated--the
so-called "content" of statements as  a  visualized  selbständig  linguistic
piece, a sort of linguistic thing that claimed to  represent  what  was  the
case, the  fact  to  which  the  statement  referred.  Since  the  claim  to
represent what was the  case  was  purely  objective,  that  is,  since  the
representation claimed was purely visual (for  there  is  no  other  way  in
which predication can be conceived to represent),  independent  from  desire
or aversion, truth--that is the actual  correspondence  between  the  stated
and the fact referred  to--was  merely  objective  too,  and  any  emotional
element was seen  as  an  ilklegitimate,  distortinng  interference  in  the
process of knowing, of attaining the truth.
      As far as  the  objectification  of  statements  is  concerned,  Plato
consummated the passage from oral to chirographic culture  by  writing  down
what he thought, though he still couched the statements under the oral  form
of dialogues-discussions concerning the truth of  the  statements  involved.
The point was to give  reasons  in  support  of  what  was  stated,  of  the
predication made, in order to make evident or  assent-compelling  the  truth
of the predication, that is, the correspondence between what was stated  and
the reality referred to.
      According to Plato, the fact or reality referred to  by  a  particular
statement as being such had to be eternal and immutable, for  otherwise  the
statement, even if true at a certain  point,  would  cease  to  be  true  at
another point. Hence the reality referred to had to be  intelligible  rather
than sensible,  for  all  sensible  realities  are  particular  rather  than
universal, and contingent and changeable rather than eternal.  Socrates  had
already glimpsed  this  conception  of  the  object  of  knowledge,  of  the
epistaton, of the knowable,  in  his  discussions  with  the  relativist  or
skeptic sophists who seemed to him to sacrifice knowledge and truth, but  it
was Plato who fully systematized it and put it in writing as  the  necessary
explanation-justification of the claim of correspondence or  genuine  rather
than fake  or  merely  apparent  or  uncertain  (mere  unjustified  opinion)
knowlege. The eternal intelligible ideas were the  true  realities  referred
to, postulated  by  Plato  in  order  to  save  knowledge  from  the  atacks
ofskeptics and relativists who themselves had the  same  conception  of  the
epistaton, of which the particular sensible contingent realities  were  only
poor shadows.
      Aristotle suppressed the eternal purely intelligible ideas. He  placed
the beginning of knowledge in the senses. Through abstraction,  hypothetical
conceptualization, and judgment-statement as reflectively justified  through
sufficient reason he placed the emphasis more  clearly  on  judgment  as  an
intellectual  act.  He  distinguished  scientific  knowledge--universal  and
necessary--from opinion-knowledge (merely  probable  or  factual  since  not
necessary, and particular rather than universal, but pragmatically  accepted
by him as knowledge quia, not propter quid). The intelligible  universal  is
found in the particular and abstracted from it, rather than in the world  of
ideas. The correspondence with the intelligible grasped  through  sufficient
compelling reason for assenting  and  affirming  shows  and  guarantees  the
knowledge propter quid.
      So  far,  Aris  corrects  and  perhaps  completes  Pato's  views.  But
Aristotle leaves some loose matters: (1) The  judgment  of  existence.  Aris
seems to assume that it is one kind of predicative  judgment  among  others.
But it is not, for as shown by Kant, unlike  genuine  predicates,  existence
does not add  anything  to  the  genuinely  predicative  judgments  about  a
particular sensible object. Consequently, no evidence, even merely  sensible
evidence, is possible in support of judgments  of  existence.  (2)  How  can
particular knowledge (like the  'knowledge'  of  existence,  for  instance),
which is not scientific but mere 'opinion," be accepted as  knowledge,  when
the correspondence is not supported by  grasped  sufficient  reason  but  by
mere natural conditioning which does not render the  correspondence  evident
so as to  compel  assent  rationally  rather  than  blindly?  (3)  Practical
knowledge is called knowledge in spite of the fact  that  it  terminates  in
action rather than in assent, that it is not predicative,  and  that  it  is
not merely objective but involves emotion and attitudes? How  can  the  same
word "knowledge" refer to  such  different  concepts  without  being  merely
equivocal? [For my part, I think that all direct knowledge is practical  and
primarily   non-predicative;   therefore,   no   such   thing   as    truth-
correspondence. If so, by calling our attention to the  practical  character
of knowledge Aris gave us the possibility of debunking  Platonism,  although
he himself did not debunk it].
Rationalism and fideism
      To go directly for the yugular in Aquinas's  synthesis  of  faith  and
reason we have to explore the area which, according to  him,  is  common  to
faith and reason--the so-called praeambula fidei--as well  as  the  autonomy
he grants reason within its own domain of truth, a portion of  which  domain
is common to reason and faith. Among these praeambula  is  God's  existence,
which is supposedly object revealed [as a predicate  in  a  statement,  that
is, as a "doctrine," or rather in my being  addressed  by-exposed  to?]  and
object  discovered  by  reason   through   strict--necessary   rather   than
persuasive, objective  rather  than  existential--demonstrative  proof  that
moves from one existential statement  (there  is  change)  to  another  (the
Unchangeable necesarily exists).
      There are, thus, according to  Aquinas,  two  sources  of  knowledge--
human reason and divine revelation--and two domains  of  knowledge--what  is
knowable to reason left to its own  devices,  and  within  which  reason  is
autonomous, on the one hand, and, on the other,  what  is  knowable  through
revelation and to which faith assents on divine  authority  rather  than  on
evidence. However, there is also a portion of  each  domain  common  to  the
other, for certain truths are knowable through both  reason  and  revelation
(though they cannot be assented  to  at  the  same  time  because  of  their
evidence and because revealed by God,  since  evidence  or  vision  excludes
faith). Is reason autonomous within this common  portion?  Only  relatively.
Indeed, since, on the one hand, reason is weak  and  fallible,  particularly
in matters related to  God  (for  the  adequate  domain  of  reason  is  the
sensible, and God is not sensible Himself, but only indirectly  through  His
effects or signs), and since, on the other hand, within this common  portion
there is divinely revealed, infallible knowledge, it follows that reason  is
only relatively autonomous within this common portion. This is to  say  that
reason is limited by faith, in that if its knowledge differs  from  what  is
revealed it has to be acknowledged by  the  Christian  as  pseudo-knowledge,
and the Christian has to assent in fatih to what God has revealed.
      We may now pass to rationalism and fideism.
      The extremest form of rationalism is the denial  of  revelation  as  a
source of knowledge and, consequently the denial of the domain  of  revealed
truths. Whatever is is knowable to reason left to its own devices, and  what
is not knowable to reason left to itks own devices  is  not.  Coonsequently,
nothing is  to  be  assented  to  on  the  basis  of  authority,  divine  or
otherwise, for reason is totally autonomous  within  the  entire  domain  of
knowledge. The Greek philosophers were  rationalists  in  this  sense.  They
assumed that if God existed, He was knowable to reason without  revelation's
aid, and if He was not so knowable  God  did  not  exist.  Since  the  Greek
philosophers denied the domain of revelation and  the  knowledge  of  faith,
they had no problem of faith and reason, for they had no roiom  fior  faith.
In the modern world, all those who deny God's existence or  who  reject  the
possibility of divine revelation, and in particular all those who hold  that
whatever is is  knowable  to  reason  left  to  its  own  devices  and  who,
therekfore, deem reason to be totally autonomous are  extreme  rationalists.
Obviously, kif oine grants Aquinas'  conception  of  faith  and  reason,  no
Christian can be  an  extreme  rationalist.  [However,  Christians  are  not
constrained by faith to see faith, reason, and their relationship,  the  way
Aquinas does. Aquinas's interpretation forces kaith and revelation into  the
Aristotelian epistemology, which  of  course  is  not  itself  a  matter  of
faith].
      The extremest form of fideism would be  the  denial  of  reason  as  a
source of knowledge, and consequently the denial of the domain  of  what  is
knowable to reason left to its own devices. I said "would  be,"  for  nobody
who is anybody in the Western intellectual tradition holds such position.
      Where  does  Aquinas  stand  in  terms  of  rationalism  and  fideism?
Obviously  Aquinas  was  neither  an  extreme  rationalist  nor  an  extreme
fideist. If anything, however, he seems to have been more  on  the  side  of
rationalism than of fideism. For not only did he acknowledge two sources  of
knowledge and grant that reason was autonomous  within  its  proper  domain,
but he contended that the domain of reason coincided partly with the  domain
of faith, that left to  its  own  devices  reason  was  capable  of  knowing
certain revealed truths, and that when so known these truths  ceased  to  be
believed as a matter of faith--that is, on the basis  of  God's  authority--
and became simply known.
      Now if, as I said, there is no extreme fideist among  Christians,  for
nobody would claim that all our knowledge is revealed, nonethelessthere  are
Christians who are "fideists" in a sense in which Aquinas himself is  not  a
fideist. "Fideists" in the sense to which I am referring are those who  deny
that there is a common portion to the domains of faith  and  of  reason  or,
what is equivalent, that certain revealed truths are  accessible  to  reason
left to its own devices--on the basis  of  evidence.  They  think  that  the
"praeambula fidei" as common to faith  and  to  reason  are  a  creation  of
Aquinas and his contemporaries under the Greek's influence,  that  there  is
no natural knowledge of God as natural knowledge is understood  by  Aquinas,
that there is not such  a  thing  as  natural  theology  or  theodicy  which
coincides as to its object (though not as to its motive) with a  portion  of
revelation and theology.
      This, it seems to me,  is  the  ordinary  or  more  common  notion  of
"fideism." But, I think, certain other  people  are  called  fideists  in  a
different  sense.  They  don't  think  that  faith  is  a  matter  of   mere
intellectual assent, even of assent by the intellect moved by the will,  for
they obscurely sense that revelation does not amount to the transmission  by
God of doctrines, and only doctrines can be assented to.*
* To suggest the difference between  actual  revelation  and  revelation  as
doctrine. Abraham encountered God and responded  to  Him  as  God  by  being
willing to sacrifice Isaac. This is actual revelation. "Ego  sum  qui  sum,"
(at least as understood by Aquinas), is a doctrine, because it  is  stated--
explicitly said--as revelation should, in order to  be  kobject  of  assent.
The 'content' of a statement is  a  doctrine.  The  'content'  of  a  divine
statement is a revealed doctrine.
      These  people see faith more as  intentional  applicative  fiducia  by
the  exposed  agent,  as  believing-in  or  trusting  in  the  God  who   is
encountered in a way in which nothing or nobdoy who is not God is or can  be
encountered, because He gratuitously comes to encounter  us.  These  people,
in other words, are perceived by  Aquinas  and  his  followers  as  fideists
because they  deny  that  God's  existence  is  a  matter  of  evidence  and
something to be asskented to (for the same reason they deny that  revelation
is a matter of dogmatically or authoritatively transmitted doctrines  to  be
assented to without evidence). Since these  people  affirm  God's  existence
and claim to believe in God while denying that their motive is  evidence  or
divine authjority, they appear to the  Thomists  as  "fideists."   In  fact,
however, these people are not  fideists.  Indeed,  fideism  presupposes  the
conception of faith according to which the act of faith is  an  intellectual
act of assent (to a doctrine revealed), whereas what these people refuse  is
the very paradigm within which faith understood in this way, and fideism  as
different from faith understood in this way,  are  conceived.  These  people
are neither rationalists nor irrationalists nor fideists; they  are  neither
philosophers, nor rational theologians, nor theologians.  They  just  escape
the  Thomist  classificatory  system,  the  Thomist  Aristotelian  paradigm.
      Let us return to Aquinas.  hat led him to accept a portion  common  to
the domains of faith and of reason, and to identify  such  a  thing  as  the
praeambula fidei?  is reasons seem to have been complex.  (1)  Saint  Paul's
famous text in Romans  about  the  natural  knowledge  of  God.   [This,  in
Aquiinas's view, regards the existence of God as known or  knowable  through
reason,  and  is  contrasted  implicity  with  the  knowledge  of  God   the
originates in revelation.  [But was this natural  knowledge  knowledge  that
God  exists,  and  prompted  by  what  the  Greek  Aquinas  kunderstands  by
evidence? In other words, do the people who know  God  naturally  move  from
the fact of movement to the ekxistence of  thew  Prime  Mover?  And  is  the
knowledge of God that  originates  in  revelation  of  this  kind,  too,  as
Aquinas seems to take it for granted?  (2) Certain truths of  reason  appear
to Aquinas as absolutely necessary, rational preconditions for  the  truth--
or at least for the rational assent to the truth--of  revealed  propositions
or statements or doctrines. For instance,  the  fact  of  divine  revelation
presupposes the capacity of human beings to know.  If one denies this  human
ability, one denies the validity, that  is,  the  truth  of  all  pieces  of
knowledge (all propositions or  doctrines  or  statements),  included  those
revealed by God.  Hence one cannot  believe  any  divinely  revealeld  truth
without implicitly presupposing that one is capable of  knowing.   Now  this
capacity cannot itself  be  object  of  revelation--at  least  according  to
certain late, post-cartesian scholastics--for that would  involve  us  in  a
vicious circle, in an infinite regress.  Or--according to  Aquinas  and  the
early scholastics--this capacity is itself implicitly revealed in  the  very
fact that any truth is divinely revealed, for God wouldn't reveal  anythging
to us if we were incapable of knowing.  Hence the  believer  can  assent  to
his or her  capacity  by  faith,  on  God's  authority.   However,  if  this
capacity couldn't be naturally known at  all,  (if  not  demonstratively  at
least implicitly and operatively), then the non-believer would be  condemned
to find  religious  belief  utterly  irrational,  and  would  be  rationally
justified in refusing to believe.   Hence  the  praeambula  fidei--at  least
some of which are divinely revealed--are knowable to reason left to its  own
devices.  This is why Aquinas claims that there is a portion common  to  the
domains of faith and of reason.
[Notice, however,  that  for  Aquinas  knowable  to  reason  means  knowable
philosophically,  reflectively,   speculatively,   assentively   (that   is,
objectively   and   contemplatively   rather   than    deliberatively    and
practically).  In other words, Aquinas seems to think that the (Catholic  or
non-Catholic) philosopher only states explicitly what the  natural  believer
would judge-believe on the basis of sufficient reason for assenting  (rather
than of deliberative  motivation  for  falling  on  his  or  her  knees  and
adoring].
