---
title: "96-SEP-2"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/1996/96-SEP-2"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.1
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\96\96-sep-2 September 9, 96

The Epistemic Subject after Post-Modernism

"Since Descartes' time the problem of the subject-object relation has bedeviled philosophy's attempt to understand the world. The framework it has left us with has been one in which we picture the subject as something 'here,' the object as another thing 'there,' and their relations as describable according to the laws of causality." (James R. Mensch, "ristotle and the Overcoming of the Subject-Object Dichotomy," in ACP Quarterly , vol. LXV, autumn 1991, Issue # 4, p. 465).

[This is the result of the visibility assumption I speak of in this paper, the assumption we make when we reflect as epistemologists].

"... it's hard to imagine... what the phrase 'closer to the truth' can mean"... "I am not suggesting, let me emphasize, that that there is a reality which science fails to get at. My point is rather that no sense can be made of the notion of reality as it has ordinarily functioned in philosophy of science ." (Thomas Kuhn, "The Trouble with the historical Philosophy of Science," Rotschild Distinguished Lecture, Nov. 19, 1991. Department of the History of Science, Harvard College, 1992. Quoted  in an exchange of letters in the NYRB, Oct 3, 1996, p. 56).

"One must... make certain of the identity of the being with whom one has the honor to discourse... Does he in fact exist? And if he does, is he then not in the process of becoming... does he ever face the future by way of action? And if he never does, will he not forgive an ethical individuality for saying that he is an ass?" (Soren Kierkegaard).

"But it was Aristotle who first gave a clearer metaphysical intepretation of logos in the sense of statement. He differentiates between onoma as semantikon aneu chronon and rhema as prosemainon chronon " (p.48).

"Essent is... that which appears primarily to vision. In a certain broad sense the Greeks looked on language from a visual point of view, that is, starting from written language. It is in writing that the spoken language comes to stand... through the flow of speech language seeps away into the impermanent... But the Greeks also knew of the phonetic character of language, the phoné . They established rhetoric and poetics. But this did not lead to an appropriate definition of the essence of language" (p. 53). (Heidegger, An Introduction to Metaphysics . See my notes in "Biblio", # 45).  

"Sustantiis autem separatis, quae sunt principia intellectus humani, et ad quae intellectus humanus se habet ut imperfectum ad perfectum, non coniungitur homo nisi per intellectum: unde in hoc ultima homininis felicitas consistit. Et ideo naturaliter homo desiderat scientiam. Nec obstat si aliqui homines scientiae huic studium non impendant... Hoc autem proponit Aristoteles ut ostendat, quod quaerere scientiam non propter aliud utile, qualis haec scientia, non est vanum, cum naturale desiderium vanun esse non possit." (4)

"Deinde ostendit quod proposuerat, per signum: quia cum sensus ad duo nobis deserviant, sc. ad cognitionem rerum, et ad utilitatem vitae; diliguntur [sensus] a nobis propter seipsos, in quantum cognoscitivi sunt, et etiam propter hoc quod utilitatem at vitam conferunt. Et hoc patet ex hoc, quod ille sensus maxime ab omnibus diligitur, qui magis cognoscitivus est, qui est visus , quem diligimus non solum ad agendum aliquid, sed etiam si nihil agere debemus. " (5)

" Omnia vero [animalia] habent sensum tactus. Ipse enim est quodammodo fundamentum aliorum sensuum . Non autem habent omnia sensum visus, quia sensus visus est omnibus aliis perfectior in cognoscendo, sed tactus est magis necessarius. Est enim cognoscitivus eorum ex quibus animal constat, sc. calidi, frigidi, humidi et sicci . Unde sicut visus inter omnes est perfectior in congnoscendo, ita tactus est magis necessarius ." (9)

"Memoria enim sequitur phantasiam, quae est motus factus secundum actum... In quibusdam vero animalibus ex sensu not fit phantasia, et sic in eis non potest esse memoria; et huiusmodi sunt animalia imperfecta, quae sunt immobilia secundum locum, ut conchilia. Cum enim in animalibus cognitio sensitiva sit provisiva ad vitae necessitatem et ad propriam operationem, animalia illa memoriam habere debent, quae moventur ad distans motu progressivo; nisi enim apud ea remaneret per memoriam intentio praeconcepta, ex qua ad motum inducuntur, motum continuare non possent quousque finem consequerentur" (10)

"Cum enim prudentia ex praeteritorum memoria de futuris provideat... Dicitur autem prudentia aliter in brutis animalibus, et aliter in hominbus esse. In hominibus quidem est prudentia secundum quod ex ratione deliberant quid eos oporteat agere; unde dicitur in sexto Ethicorum , quod prudentia est recta ratio agibilium. Iudicium autem de rebus agendis non ex rationis deliberatione, sed ex quodam naturae instinctu, prudentia in aliis animalibus dicitur. Unde prudentia in aliis animalibus est naturalis aestimatio de convenientibus prosequendis, et fugiendis nocivis, sicut agnus sequitur matrem et fugit lupum" (11).

"Experimentum est enim ex collatione plurium singularium in memoria receptorum. Huiusmodi autem collatio est homini propria, et pertinet ad vim cogitativam, quae ratio particularis dicitur... Et quia ex multis sensibus et memoria animalia ad aliquid consuescunt prosequendum et vitandum, inde est quod aliquid experimenti, licet parum, participare videntur. Homines autem supra experimentum, quod pertinet ad rationem particularem, habent rationem universalem, per quam vivunt, sicut per id quod est principale in eis." (15

"Sicut autem se habet experimentum ad rationem particularem..., ita se habet ars ad rationem universalem." (16)

"... ex memoria in hominibus experimentum causatur. Modus autem causandi est iste: quia ex multis memoriis unius rei accipit homo experimentum de aliquo, quo experimento potens est ad facile et recte operandum. Et ideo quia potentiam recte et faciliter operandi praebet experimentum , videtur fere esse simile arti et scientiae. Est enim similitudo eo quod utrobique ex multis una acceptio alicuius rei sumitur. Dissimilitudo autem, quia per artem accipiuntur universalia, per experimentum singularia." (17)

"Ex experientia in hominibus fit scientia et ars... experimentum fit ex memoria. Nam sicut ex multis memoriis fit una experimentalis scientia, ita ex multis experimentis apprehensis fit universalis acceptio de omnibus similibus. Unde plus habet hoc ars quam experimentum quia experimentum tantum circa singularia versatur." (18)

"... quantum ad actum pertinet, experientia nihil videtur differre ab arte. Cum enim ad actionem venitur, tollitur differentia quae inter experimentum et artem erat per universale et singulare: quia sicut experimentum circa singularia operatur, ita et ars; unde praedicta differentia erat in cognoscendo tantum. Sed quamvis in modo operandi ars et experimentum non differant, quia utraque circa singularia operatur, differunt tamen in efficacia operandi. Nam experti magis proficiunt in operando illis qui habent rationem universalem artis sine experimento." (20)

"Cuius causa est, quia actiones sunt circa singularia... Unde medicus non sanat hominem nisi per accidens, sed per se sanat Platonem aut Socratem..." (21)

"Unde cum ars sit universalium, experientia singularium, si aliquis habet rationem artis sine experientia, erit quidem perfectus in hoc quod universale cognoscat; sed quia ignorat singulare cum experimento careat, multoties in curando peccabit..." (22)

"Comparat experimentum ad artem quantum ad cognitionem... Proponit autem praeemientiam [artis supra experimentum} tripliciter. Prima probatio talis est. Illi qui sciunt causam et propter quid, scientiores sunt et sapientiores illis qui ignorant causam, sed solum sciunt quia. Experti autem sciunt quia sed nesciunt propter quid. Artifices vero sciunt causam et propter quid." (24)

"... signum scientis est, quod possit docere, quod est scientiam in alio causare. Artifices autem docere possunt, quia cum causas cognoscant, ex eis possunt demonstrare... demonstratio autem est syllogismus faciens scire, ut dicitur primo Posteriorum . Experti autem non possunt docere, quia non possunt ad scientiam perducere, cum causam ignorent. Et si ea quae experimento cognoscunt aliis tradant, non recipient per modum scientiae, sed per modum opinionis vel credultiatis. Unde patet quod artifices sint magis sapientes et scientes expertis." (29)

"... nullum sensum dicimus sapientiam, scilicet propter quod licet aliquis sensus cognoscat quia, tamen non propter quid cognoscit. Tactus enim iudicat quod ignis calidus est, non tamen apprehendit propter quid; ergo experti  qui habent singularium cognitionem causam ignorantes, sapientes dici non possunt" (30)

"Ergo scientiae aliquae sunt magis admirabiles et magis dignae nomine sapientiae propter eminentiorem sensum, et non propter utilitatem." (31)

"Cum igitur plures artes sint repertae quantum ad uitilitatem, quarum quaedam sunt ad vitae necessitatem, sicut mechanicae; quaedam vero ad introductionem in aliis scientiis, sicut scientiae logicales; illi artifices dicendi sunt sapientiores, quorum scientiae non sunt ad utilitatem inventae, sed propter ipsum scire, cuiusmodi sunt scientiae speculativae." (32)

"Et quod [speculativae scientiae] non sunt propter huiusmodi [vel ad necessitatem vitae, vel ad voluptatem, sed propter seipsas repertae] patet ex loco quod inventae sunt. In locis enim illis primo repertae sunt, ubi primo homines studuerunt circa talia. Alia littera habet, 'Et primum his locis ubi vacabant' id est ab aliis occupationibus quiescentes studio vacabant quasi necessariis abundantes. Unde et circa Aegyptum primo inventae sunt artes mathematicae, quae sunt maxime speculativae, a sacerdotibus, qui sunt concessi studio vacare, et de publico expensas habebant, sicut etiam legitur in Genesi". (33)

"Sed quia usus nomine artis fuerat et sapientiae et scientiae indiferenter, ne aliquis putet haec omnia esse nomina synonyma idem penitus significantia hanc opinionem removet, et remittit ad... sextum Ethicorum , ubi dictum est, in quo differant scientia et ars et sapientia et prudentia et intellectus. Et ut breviter dicatur, sapientia et scientia et intellectus sunt circa partem animae speculativam, quam ibi scientificum animae appellat.  Scientia vero est conclusionis ex causis inferioribus. Sapientia considerat causas primas. Unde ibidem dicitur caput scientiarum. Prudentia vero et ars est circa animae partem practicam, quae est ratiocinativa de contingentibus operabilis a nobis. Et differunt: nam prudentia dirigit in actionibus quae non transeunt ad exteriorem materiam, sed sunt perfectiones agentis: unde dicitur ibi quod prudentia est recta ratio agibilium. Ars vero dirigit in factionibus, quae in materiam exteriorem transeunt, sicut aedificare et secare: unde dicitur quod ars est recta ratio factibilium." (34) ( Aquinas' Commentary on Aris' Metpahysicorum I, 1, i. 1-35) .

It will be my contention in this paper that Post-Modernism

as the logical outcome and terminus of a long chain of events that began with the birth of philosophy brings the philosophical epoch to its closure and, together with it, the notion itself of the epistemic subject as unexposed and separated from the agent.

The birth of philosophy

Historically, philosophers came into existence by distinguishing themselves from the Sophists in the fourth century BC, in Greece. Now, as is well known, practically all our knowledge of the Sophists originates from Plato , given that no writings of the Sophists survived, and Plato himself was no friend of the Sophists.  Indeed, he saw the sophists as enemies of the polis and corruptors of the youth because they denied the possibility of reaching a common truth and consequently led people to skepticism , something which couldn't fail to have the most deleterious consequences for the life of the city.

In the last thirty years or so Plato has been direly criticized for having transmitted to posterity a biased view of the Sophists, and there is good reason to believe that the charge is at least in part correct. Fortunately, for the purposes of the present paper, whether or not Plato's portrayal of the Sophists and their intentions is accurate is of no consequence. For what is important here is not what the Philosophers--Plato the first among them--thought of the Sophists, but what the Philosophers themselves determined to do in response to what they thought of the Sophists, and on this score Plato's works are quite reliable. What the philosophers determined to do--and what consequently came to define their very identity as philosophers--was to vindicate knowledge and truth once and forever against the attacks of all relativists and skeptics, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, against the illusions and encroachments of all the unthinking people who accepted custom or authority as unimpeachable sources of knowledge and truth .

Philosophers, therefore, saw themselves as the alternative between the relativists and skeptics who denied the very possibility of firm, certain knowledge and unvarying, common truth, and those who blindly took for granted whatever custom or authority declared to be true. We need, however, a more precise idea of what the philosophers were about. This we will gain by  finding out how they conceived what they were looking for, namely "knowledge," and where they looked for it .

Philosophers and sophists on "knowledge" and "truth"

The terms "knowledge" and "truth" are closely related to each other. Indeed, knowledge which is not true is a contradiction in terms. Thus it would seem that there is no need for the word "truth" in addition to knowledge. Such would be the case, indeed, were it not for the fact that there is such a thing as counterfeited knowledge, what merely appears to be the case , what has the appearance of knowledge but turns out to be false and which is, therefore, not genuine knowledge.

What complicates this matters still more is that discerning apparent from genuine knowledge is no easy task, if at all possible. Actually, the skepticism of at least some of the sophists originated precisely from the difficulty or even impossibility of discerning genuine knowledge from apparent knowledge . This difficulty was cynically exploited by some rhetoricians who taught young people not to care whether what they attempted to convince others of was true, but whether it was to their benefit. An argument, in the view of these rhetoricians, was good if it manged to convince people, regardless of whether it was true or not. The bad name of the sophists as given to "sophistry" came from these scoundrels.

There were other sophists, however, though Plato does not distinguish the latter from the former, who (no less than philosophers like Socrates and Plato himself were later to do) had struggled with the problem of distinguishing genuine from merely apparent knowledge in the hope of finding a way out of the impasse, and had failed. Their reasons or arguments were not stupid or inconsiderable . "Man is the measure of all things," said Protagoras, meaning that truth is different for each individual. Doesn't indeed one individual perceive the wind as cold whereas another perceives the same wind as hot? And how can their perceptions be corrected but on the basis of another perception? And would not this other perception be as parochial, as idiosyncratic, as unfalsifiable as the other two? As for declaring the perception of the majority the true one, doesn't this amount to saying that knowledge is a matter of convention? And doesn't it follow that custom as the ultimate arbiter of what is right and wrong in matters of conduct is blind, and that what is good in Athens is wrong in Sparta?

Against Plato and the Platonic tradition that accused  the Sophists of sophistry by opposition to the Philosophers who championned knowledge and truth, Kerferd has forcefully attempted to vindicate the former:

It has often been said that the main function of the sophists was to prepare the way for Plato, and this is regularly said in such a way as to suggest that they are therefore of only limited importance. But virtually every point in Plato's thought has its starting point in his reflection upon problems raised by the sophists...

If we ask what is the most marked single characteristic of the movement as a whole, the answer must be the sustained attempt to achieve an understanding of both rational and irrational processes... ( The Sophistic Movement , pp. 173-175). . What I need to quote is longer

Protagoras and Gorgias, came to despair of the possibility of  reaching knowledge. But what was knowledge for them? Exactly the same that it was for philosophers: An image or re-presentation (in the knower) of a reality (outside the knower) -- the image expressed in a statement (logos) when stated . For knowledge, however, to be genuine rather than merely apparent the image had to resemble the original to which it referred, it had to re-present the real object. This, however, argued the sophists, was impossible.

Kant's epistemological revolution

The sophists' arguments must have had more weight than Plato and his followers acknowledged, since they have surfaced again and again through the ages and it is doubtful that they have been satisfactorily answered. To mention but one important instance, was it not the impossibility of comparing the mental image with the reality imaged, or more precisely the impossibility of ever coming to know a reality in itself independently of its being known, what prompted Kant to effect his Copernican Revolution and give up the idea of truth, that is, of genuine knowledge, as the adequation of the mind to such reality? Was not Kant, at least in this important instance, becoming the ally of the sophists and the enemy of philosophers concerning the impossibility of knowledge as re-presentation ? Thus there is an undeniable continuity in the history of philosophy from the sophists on in that at least until Kant we were still responding to the questions raised by the Sophists in their own terms , since Kant was going along with the sophistic as to the impossibility of knowledge as adequation to the real, while nonetheless joining forces with the philosophers as to the possibility of knowledge and truth within specified limits. *

* Certainly Kant changed the notion of reality or the object of knowledge as something in itself and existing independently of its being known. Consequently he changed the notion of truth as correspondence or similarity with that kind of reality . [However he kept fundamentally the terms in which the sophists couched the debate. For it was precisely in opposition to the notions of knowledge and of reality  shared by both the sophists and the philsophers that he effected his Copernican revolution and introduced his new notion of truth, of what is knowable, and of what 'is' but is accessible only through postulating faith (namely, the agent--and the Other?).] He kept, however, the notion of knowledge-known (sedimented knowledge) as something judged-stated-contemplated (what appears, and merely 'appears' to a contemplator for it is not object of exposure, feelings being taken into account only as unintentional impressions) and which is confirmed by intuition that makes it evident and, therefore, true . Whatever appears but is not, or cannot possibly be, intuited, is mere illusion. Thus knowledge remains a matter of seeing something seen, namely, what is the case,  rather than of dramatic encounter of an agent-patient with something encountered .

Kant definitely changed the notion of reality as something in itself independently of its being known or even knowable. Both for Aristotle and for Kant knowledge and reality are correlates . For both knowable and real are convertible in that whatever is knowable is real and whatever is real is knowable. Yet their views are radically different . For the commonsensical Aristotle, there is a primacy of being over knowledge, an independence or selbständigkeit of being, and a dependence of knowledge on being. For Aristotle, something is knowable because it is, and it is even if it is not actually known. Being is conceivable without knowledge, but knowledge is not conceivable without being because knowledge cannot be but knowledge of being. For Kant, by contrast, there is no logical primacy of being over knowledge: something is because it is knowable or "objective," that is, object of possible knowledge. Thus there is no selbständigkeit or even merely conceptual independence of what is from what is knowable.  Being and being knowable are conceptually identical.

In effecting his Copernican revolution through which the notion of reality is modified--what is becomes conceptually identical with what is knowable or objective, so that being (what is) is synonymous with, and reduced to, being knowable-- Kant ipso facto modified the notion of truth as the adequation of knowledge to being--of knowledge as re-presentation of what is * --and, consequently, of the subordination of knowledge to reality .

* All the skeptical objections of the sophists presuppose, and are based in, this commonsensical notion of knowledge and truth . It is precisely the impossibility of the adequation of the mind to reality, or at any rate the impossibility of verifying that such adequation obtains, that constitutes the strength of their objections. For their part, the philosophers thought that the objections could be solved and, thus, that knowledge could be rescued. But the important point is that they kept intact the notion of truth as adequation of the mind to reality . Only with Kant, who finally acknowledged the invincible strength of the skeptical objections against knowledge as adequation to reality, and against truth as knowledge of such adequation , and who saw in his Copernican Revolution the escape from such invincible objections, is the traditional notion of truth abandoned.  

Indeed, the traditional notion of truth as adequation to reality is a correlate of the notion of reality as independent from the knowing mind. Only on the assumption of a duality between the knower and reality can truth be conceived in the way it had been conceived until Kant . Truth as adequation between knowledge and reality implies a certain duality between knowledge and being, a correspondence between the re-presentation and the reality represented, a non-identity betwween the adequated mind and that to which it is adequated. As the Aristotelian Aquinas put it, acknowledging the duality between knowledge and being, "Truth is formally in the (knower's) judgment, causally in the reality known."

Seeing as the model of Greek epistemology

For all the sweeping epistemological changes brought about by Kant, there was, however, one epistemic assumption left intact by his Copernican Revolution, an assumption that had been common to both the Greek sophists and the philosophers and which Kant himself shared with both groups, namely, that knowing consists in a certain kind of seeing and that being-known consists in a certain kind of being seen. *

* Thus, for Kant, only that which is object of intuition --that is, which can be " seen" in the way specified by him rather than merely thought or imagined, is real or objective, that is, genuinely knowable. Hence, neither time, nor space, which as subjective conditions of objectivity cannot themselves be intuited, nor God or the free subject, which being ideas of reason cannot be intuited either, are real or objective. - What is more important, Kant kpreserves the notion of correspondence and lack thereof between what might be called the mental image and the objective object. Thus God is a mental image, "an idea of reason," which has no similarity to anything and is, therefore, not objective, since what is objective is object of possible intuition.

This point is so important that it deserves to be developed. In the Western tradition inaugurated by the Greek sophists and philosophers there is a constant assumption which the post-modernists themselves have not modified, since the post-modernists are skeptical precisely because of the impossibility of visible presence. I will call it the assumption of visibility .

In this view, knowledge is distinguished and divorced from feeling and acting, for it is conceived on the model of seeing and, correlatively, reality on the model of something visible and to be seen rather than something encountered by a vulnerable agent-patient and to be responded to.

The analogy between knowing and seeing is automatically assumed. Our epistemic language is pervaded by the metaphor of seeing--as exemplified in such expressions as "I don't see your point," "This is evident" (from the Latin videre , to see), "The mind's eye," etc. This so pervading metaphor reflects our intimate conviction that knowing really is analogous to seeing and, consequently, that reality is analogus to what is visible.

Obviously, we are dealing with a metaphor, for few if any people in the epistemic tradition have claimed that only what is visible in the literal sense is real. After all, sight is only one of the five senses, and nobody would say that blind people who do not see anything in the literal sense are thereby radically incapable of knowing, or less capable of knowing what is the case than the rest of us. Though deprived of sight, blind people sense or experience the world around us no less than the rest of us. They even use as the rest of us such expressions as "I see" or "Evidently," which shows their metaphorical rather than literal character. Moreover, even those people who consider knowledge to be a matter of intellectual judgment rather than a mere affair of the senses share the assumption of visibility of which I am speaking.

What is distinctive in the epistemic visual model? Not only that it pre-defines the real as an apparition, as a penomenon, as something that appears visually (however special the apparition may be: clear and distinct idea, object of sensible intuition, object of intellection, object of judgment, object of universal and necessary judgment, etc.), so that what is not 'visible' in the specified way is not real, *  but that it correlatively predifines the status of the knower as a knowing mind, that is, as a non-situated, non-involved, invulnerable, neutral or purely objective passionless bodyless unobservable and therefore unreal TRANSCENDENT OBSERVER OR VOYEUR .

Indeed, unlike touching which involves being touched, seeing is not necessarily reciprocal : one can see without being seen by what one sees. The visual model is unidirectional and bidimensional .  Moreover, in the visual model the seeer, that is, the subject, is that to which what appears is visible, but it is not of the concept of seeer to be itself visible. Not so in the case of the toucher, of the touching subject , who in order to touch has to be touchable, to be as exposed to what is touched as what is touched is exposed to the touching subject.

Far from modifying the assumption that the real is what appears in knowledge and that knowing is seeing what appears, Kant reaffirmed this assumption in what he deemed to be its only appropriate and most radical form by reducing the real or objective to what appears or can appear in "intuition," whereas previously the real had been understood as what appears or manifests itself but--however illogically, as suspected by the sophists and forcefully argued by Kant--cannot be reduced to its appearing, for it is in itself independently of its actual or possible appearing . *

* What Kant did was to show by means of argument that if such being in itself does not appear it is neither known nor knowable and is, therefore, not objective. The notion of existence in itself, of being beyond possible appearing, is nonsensical; hence reality in itself is mythical, however unavoidable the illusion of its existence might otherwise be. [This note is inexact. It needs elaboration and refining. Cf the existence of the 100 thalers].

A concrete example may serve us well to continue unpacking the content of the assumption of visibility to which Kant did not only remain true but which he pushed farther than anyone in the tradition by reducing the real (or the objective? or the knowable?) to what appears in intuition. Consider the following version of a point made by Kant:

The connection between pure apperception and the categories Kant establishes through an examination of judgments. Compare the following two judgments: (1) 'Bodies have weight'; and (2) 'When I lift this body, I note a pressure on the hand that lifts it.' One difference between (1) and (2) is that (1) expresses objective knowledge about bodies, while (2) does not. In (2) no objective connection is made between the concepts 'body' and 'weight.' Such an objective connection is, however, found in (1); there we have a unity, a synthesis, of these two concepts. The concept 'body' and the concept 'weight' are, so to say, thought together in the object (i.e., in the judgment's subject). Judgment (2) is subjective, it reports only what I notice when I lift the body and implies nothing about what others notice. It says nothing at all about the concepts 'body' and 'weight' being in some way connected. Judgment (1), on the other hand, is objective. It implies that regardless of who lifts the body, that person will notice a pressure. The concepts 'body' and 'weight' are brought into an objective unity in the sense that this declared unity is independent of what is subjective, but also in the sense that the two concepts are united in an object. (Justus Harnack, Kant's Theory of Knowledge (Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., 1967, pp. 55-56).

Underlying the distinction between objective and subjective judgments is the radical distinction between objective sensations and subjective feelings or mere affections . Objective are those sensations that are 'intentional' or informative about objects, whereas feelings do not possess any informational value but are self-contained and, therefore, merely subjective, non-cognitive, purely personal in the sense that they do not send the subject toward the surrounding world and are, therefore, merely internal and private rather than publically knowable or VISIBLE .

  That the distinction between sensations and feelings underlies the above paragraph on Kant's views is clear. When I am hit in the back by somebody's hand I experience pain, which is merely subjective, and I have a sensation of a hand touching me, which is objective or cognitive of object. In this view, there are two things. One, my pain, which is purely subjective, a mere feeling, an affection that does not give me any cognition or semblance of cognition of object, but merely accompanies the knowldge of object. The other, my sensationwhich is objecktive in the sense that it informs me of a hand hitting me. But do I have two experiences, a feeling and a sensation, or only one that points in two directions, objective and subjective? Let us see.

Touching something involves being touched, the passive and the active sides of touching. But there are not two different things for the experiencing subject--touching and being touched--but one experience pointing in two directions . You who are not me, you who see me, you contemplator, can ask me to tell you about what touched me (objective direction), or about what I feel when I am being touched, but you are asking me to talk about the two directions of what for me was one and the same experience. My experience is "of a hand touching me" only because it is experience "(of myself) being touched by a hand."

What I am driving at is that there is an appearing here, an experiencing, that is not of the order of visibility,  as it is when I see your hand touching sombody else than myself (a visible body) . * In the latter case I see your hand touching somebody, whereas in the former I feel your hand touching me, much unlike the pilot in his ship--as underscored by Descartes. This experience is of the order of being affected , and it is an inseparable unit: I-feel-your-hand-touching-me or I-feel-being-touched-by-your-hand . Furthermore, as an affection, as a feeling, it is uniquely mine and private [would Kant say merely subjective?], for it is an appearing that appears to me only, since it is an appearing through feeling , and only I experience my feeling. By contrast, when I see your hand touching my arm, I see what anyone else can see (or in certain cases hear)--something public, objective, relatively independent from my seing it since other people see or can see it too and confirm what I see, therefore not an affection of mine, and in addition,supposedly, I have a private feeling, an affection, caused by something which happens to be your hand but which by itself is not informative about object, about your hand touching me.

* Moreover, I can be seen without realizing it, for being seen is not something that one feels or is affected by. By contrast, however, I cannot be touched without feeling it; it affects me.

Now, unlike seeing or being seen, being touched refers me to myself being exposed to that which touches me and to myself actually affected in a desirable or undesirable way by that to which I am exposed-vulnerable. In this way being touched is not a mere feeling or internal, surd, affection but is connected with intentional action , with action that will incarnate my purpose to be achieved through bringing about a definite state of affairs.

An alternative to the asumptiion of visibility

Now, the latter represents a particular way of analyzing or breaking down into its supposed elements the unit "I feel myself being touched by your hand" or its equivalent "I-feel-your-hand-touching-me" according to the model of visibility, in which the (object) experienced is deemed to be publicly observable and clearly different fromm the subject experiencing it visually, since I see you distant from me and different from the hand touching you . * As a result the affection involved in the experience becomes "a mere feeling,' a surd residue without any intentional or informative value, with no objective correlate, which incidentally happens to accompany certain pieces of knowledge.

* More than all the other senses the sense of sight conveys to us the objectivity of the object and its independence from the subject . (Isn't this the reason why the Platonizing Aristotle and his followe Aquinas consider the sense of sight the most cognitional of the senses?). Its objectivity, because unlike the senses of smelling and hearing, which only announce or signify the object, sight gives us the object in intuitive presence, in a presence sufficiently distant for us to realize its non-identity with us. Its independence, because in tasting and touching it is difficult to distinguish the passive or affective or subjective side from the active or objective one, whereas in the case of sight the very distance of the object from the subject and their obvious duality manifests the independence of the object perceived from the perceiving subject.

Why should we prefer at all the analysis that breaks down the experiential unit into two pieces, one objective and one merely subjective, based on the epistemic model of visibility, to an interpretation that would preserve the unbroken experiential unit in which feeling is object-intending as well as self-referential to being vulnerable ( whereas purely visual sensation of object has as its correlate apparition, what appears? Actually, such visual sensation does not suffice to be object-intending in the sense of yielding the independent existence of its object, mcuch less the existence of object of exposure, of that to which I am ekxposed. The visible objects yielded bu such sensations are like Derridean 'texts' which are only to be talked about by contemplators rather than lived by the agents who participate in them and co-create them, and which therefore are only to-be-interpreted by voyeurs and can be interpreted in an indefinite number of ways which are all equally possible and undecidable ). A second question we should ask is whether, as far as the nature of reality is concerned, the two models are equivalent.

The answer to the first question would take us back to the epistemic puzzles originally confronted by sophists and philosophers , all of which have to do with pure phenomenality or visibility. The second question comes first. Are the two models equivalent concerning thje nature of reality?

Suppose that the only sense we humans were endowed with were the sense of sight, and in particular that we did have no sense of touch, so that when touching or being touched we experienced or felt absolutely nothing, exactly as a table feels nothing when touched or hit, as it happens to be the case under heavy sedation . In that case, to refer to the example used above in the paragraph about Kant by Hartnack, if I lifted a body I would see that body rise together with my hand, but I wouldn't feel any pressure on my hand and, consequently, I would never make the judgment that this body weighs, much less that bodies weigh (see Critique of P.R , Müller, p. 8). This seems to show that my feeling of being pressured, although it is private in the sense of being felt only by me, is nonetheless objective or intentional of object, since it informs me of the weight of the body I lift, which is the body which everybody sees, for it is to the body which everybody sees that I attribute weight. Thus my feeling of being pressured may be mine and private in a certain sense (much as my perception of color, my sensation of the green of this leaf, is so), but it is not merely subjective, since it informs me of the body's weight. Hence the interpretation of experience that filters the affgection from the sensation and construes the affection as mere feeling rather than as feeling of being pressured by a heavy body does not do justice to our experience, for at least in this case the feeling is intentional of object.

But this is not quite fair to Kant . Reread Hartnakck and you will see that Kant grants that my subjective feeling is informative of object and not merely subjective, since everybody feels pressure when lifting a body. Indeed, it informs me that this body weighs and that bodies weigh. However, there is a problem with Kant. That weight is objective-real Kant acknowledges, for it is object of transcendental (or public?) intuition in the sense just alluded to. However, the I-subject who feels pressured by the body I lift (and that there is even an I, that is, a personal body who lifts the body) Kant does not acknowledge as objective-real (see Critique of P. R. , transl. Müller, pp. 103-106). Why not? Because though it 'appears' to me in the sense that it is experienced by me, that I am affected, it is not and cannot be object of intuition because it does not and cannot appear publicly, that is, because it is not publicly visible , and not even visible at all but mere subjective condition of unity which is not what is expereienced by the subject.

Now, Kant has a point in that the subject does not experience himself or herself as object, but he is wrong in imagining that we experience ourselves as mere contemplators . Each of us experiences himself or herself as being the vulnerable being which encounters the other than itself (which is why we live in the mood of being careful ), and this is reflected in the kind of language we use. Certainly the subject experiences himself or herself not as experienced but as experiencer, not as object but as subject; not, however, as mere contemplator (s Kant assumes) but as vulnerable exposed, as being the subject who encounters. * T this Kant cannot acknowledge because he has no room for this non-objective and nonetheless not-unreal experience of the subject as being exposed, as subject of passive and active exposure . For Kant only what appears and what appears as object can be objective or knowable or  real, and the subject, by definition, cannot appear as object while remaining subject: if it appears it is object, and if it is subject it cannot appear. But does not the object encountered "appear" as encountered, that is, as not merely phenomenal? And cannot being cautious-vulnerable subject (for good and bad, for being hurt as well as for being loved and caressed, which is only experienced by the subject of passivity, but is publicly acknowledged linguistically) be the subjective-real (I cannot say manifestation or appearance, for this refers us to visibility of the subject) mode of being? * And does not the narrative, rather than the scientific genre, preserve this structure?  

* The speaking subject cannot be objectified without ceasing to speak-address in the vocative . ( WE CAN ONLY SUBJECTIFY OURSELVES NARRATIVELY IN THE PAST , because the narrative keeps the past subject as living toward a not yet defined future in temporal continuity with the past-self and the past state of the world or situation to which one was exposed ). The speaking subject is an agent-patient exposed to other agents-patients to whom he speaks and listens, and exposed to other non-agents-patients. The beauty of narratives is that because of the co-presence of the agents-speakers within the narrative as temporal dramatic unit, although not copresence to the reader (narrative past), it preserves the life of agency and language as a past in relation to the reader, or as imaginary (or at best as imaginary re-production of the past) in the case of plays . Scientific language , by contrast --even the language of orally given papers--is dead, ossified, objectified language, for it states the objectified. It is language without individual, situated, exposed speaker speaking to individual, situated, exposed listeners-speakers. It consequently looks like statements that are supposed to re-produce the world and be true in the measure of the fidelity of the re-production .

This example shows, in the first place, that the epistemic model of visibility is not equivalent, as far as reality is concerned, to what for the moment I will call the epistemic model of affectibility , according to which our affections are intentional of object, not merely subjective feeling and self-referential to being subject . Indeed, as indicated by the fiction of a person who had no other sense at all than the sense of sight, for that person real objects would be mere visual weightless appearances. Suchj a person would never make out the difference between optical illusions and real objects, at least not in the sense of being personally exposed and vulnerable to them. Moreover, since that person would have no affections, that is, would not experience its being affected by the objects in the surrounding world, that person would be related to his or her own body as one is related to other bodies, for one sees other bodies touch each other but one does not feel their touching or being touched. The only body one feels touching and being touched (and simultaneously so, when one touches oneself) is one's own , and without the sense of touch one would not feel touching or being touched. Therefore, one would have no one's own body as a unique body, as one's own body. [This rejoins and articulates further my objection to Kant in Kantkurt]. Thus, not only would all other objects in the surrounding world be experienced as weightless, purely visual appearances, but one's own body would also be experienced in the same way, which of course is not the way in which we actually experience our own body as real. Fortunately for us, who are gifted with five senses, not just with the sense of sight, such is not the way in which we experience our own body and the objects by which we are surrounded. Thus it cannot be maintained that the visibility model of reality is the right model for our experience of the world aroung us and of ourselves .  

xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

Let me begin again . My pain when you hit me in the back is

not informative about object. This means that I do not know anything of that which hit me. By contrast, if you caress me in the back, I know that I was touched by a hand, I know the hand that touched me. Yet, when you caress me, I may also experience pleasure, which is not informative of object and, therefore, not cognitive, not conveying knowledge. Now, precisely because of this, Kant, without denying feelings, is not interested in them in the first Critique, which deals only with knowledge and what is itself knowable or a condition for knowledge . But my question is: why does he deny that my sensation of hand or even hand caressing is cognitive, and my feeling of pleasure is not? Because the former appears publicly and the other is private, that is, does not become visible. Visible, then, is what can be experienced by all those capable of knowing, whereas what cannot be so experienced is not visible, not knowable, not objective, not real, but merely subjective.   

Not surprisingly, from the unity of the object (hand caressing me) Kant deduces the unity of the apperceiver. He deduces it because the apperceiver is not experienced, since experienced means visible, publically visible, and even if we were tu assume that the experiencing self is experienced, it is not experienced in the sense that interests Kant, for not being publicly visible it is not objective, not knowable, not real. And here, at last, do we come to my point. Identifying the real, the knowable as the visible, that is, what can appear in experience to all knowers as such, Kant  has implicitly predetermined that the knowing subject is not real but a mere unity of apperception--and a unity of apperception which does not perceive since it does not experience itself perceiving! (Careful, see Critique of P. R , transl. Müller, note p. 289).

Reason for the pervasivenesss of the visibility model

But, then, why is the visibility model of knowledge, which does not square with our experience, taken so seriously as epistemic model? The reason is that it is, precisely, an epistemic model, that is, a model that irremediably leads to a particular interpretation of knowledge as re-production as something that needs justification ( precisely because it is conceived as a visual image of the [real] object in the mind ). Let me explain.

That knowledge as an image of the real cannot in fact be justified is shown by the failure of the entire philosophical tradition to give satisfactory answers to the objections of the sophists. That knowledge as an image of the real was indeed in need of justification shows in the very power of the objections. Indeed, they are insurmountable if knowledge is an image, if knowing is imaging, and if being a knower is being related to the rest of reality as a pure contemplator. But the question is: why do we fall so spontaneously into the trap of this model and find it so difficult to escape from it?

I think that the reason is, as I just said, that we are dealing with an epistemic model , that is, with an interpretation of knowledge as an image of reality and with the consequent, unsuccessful attempts to justify knowledge so conceivecd. However, such an interpretation is not the only possible one, nor the one that seems to square with the agent's experience rather than with the experience of someone who contemplates the agent and sees the agent as a knower rather than as an agent.

Indeed, the involved agent acts in concrete circumstances and according to his or her perception-understanding of the world, an understanding which is part and parcel of his or her identity as an agent (rather than possessing that perception-understanding, or perception-as) as a linguistic member of a given culture by which he or she is shaped and which he or she contributes to shape. Acknowledged illusions, errors, disagreements occur. This does not prevent agents from acting. This doesn't  undermine radically their self-confidence in action, although it leads the most reflective of them to be less rash in their actions when possible, to consult with others, to acknowledge practically their fallibility which results in mistaken actions for which there is always a price to pay . Insofar as there is 'knowledge' involved here, it is practical, applicative knowledge--self-referential, existential, whose subject is an exposed agent and whose object is not to be seen but to be responded to appropriately.

Philosophers and sophists, though, are not involved agents; they are epistemologists who, being aware of illusions, errors, and disagreements, cease to act and pause to understand knowledge and find a way out of their quandary . What they do is to reflect on observed knowers and knowledge ( not on agents, since they are interested in knowedge, not on action, and they have already divorced knowledge from action as something complete in itself. By the same token, since feelings have nothing to do with the object seen--only with the object of exposure--and are supposedly connected with action but not with knowledge, they are also considered irrelevant ). That is, they objectify knowers and knowledge as objects-there, as facts that appear 'visually,' so to say, that is, that can be, if not literally seen, at least grasped through a concept that renders their identity 'visible' to the understanding .

Now, not only are the knowers reflected upon conceived by the philosophers as contemplators of objects of contemplation, but the reflecting philosophers themselves are mere contemplators or visual interpreters--mere observers--for they themselves are not involved in action and not exposed to the knowers they contemplate or to the objects the observed knowers and the philosophers themselves contemplate. In other words, the reflecting philosophers are not involved in interaction with the knowers or with the objects known by them, they are just voyeurs who want to understand knowledge by explaining how it occurs and to justify its validity. *

* I may now be in a better position to clarify what I mean by the visibility assumption. Visibility is identified here as a relationship observer-observed by contrast to the relationship exposed agent to that to which he or she is exposed.

(1) The alternative to the visibility assumption implies thinking from the standpoint of the agent involved in interaction , of the exposed-vulnerable agent, by contrast to the pure invulnerable contemplator, the objective-disinterested observer. Hence no divorce of knowing from acting , consequently no primacy of knowledge over action and no possible separation, as in Kant's case, between a First Critique that deals with knowledge as independent from action, with a knower that has nothing to do but to conbstitute the object and intuit, and a Second Critique that deals with an agent who escapes the order of causality and who, as such, is called to ignore emotions and to be guided only by the categorical imperative and a respect appropriate only to the kingdom of ends.

(2) It implies, therefore, a reevaluation of practical-knowledge, with the consequent reevaluation of emotions as cognitional .

(3) It implies giving up foundationalism and any absolute pre-justification (and even post-justification) of knowledge . The most that can be aspired to is intra-cultural persuasion ad hominem , and inter-cultural perusasion on the basis of one's fidelity to one's own tradition and ultimately on the basis of witnessing.

(4) Probably the model for thinking from the vulnerable-agent's standpoint has to come from dramatic narratives , for they preserve the Kierkegaardian facing the future by way of decision and action, as well as from the incomplete, ongoing, open to an undefined future, particular narrative in which the speaker is involved in the first person.

Since we, the people concerned with epistemology, are ourselves, like the philosophers, reflecting on knowledge rather than being engaged in action, it is hardly surprising that we find their assumptions natural, thereby falling into the trap of their paradigm . What we need is to escape from their paradigm, which is what we do when we are engaged in action.

The Greek epistemic tradition

To take a different tack. I am aiming at showing the arbitrariness, and ultimately the wrongheadedness of an epistemic tradition (the Greek scientific tradition, the Greek speculative tradition) that systematically subjectivizes feeling and excludes what can be felt but not observed from the objective, cognitional realm. This tradition automatically divorces theory and practice, thereby rendering knowledge purely contemplative and human action purely behavioral. In addition, it objectivizes reality thereby rendering it a value-neutral, all-encompassing two-dimensional picture without existential depth.

It seems that in the Aristotelian tradition of practical reason , within which attitudes (which are, or at least can be construed as, neither surd subjective feelings neither contemplatively intentional), and which rejoins the intuitions of the "good sophists" of Protagoras' kind, we have at least a hint of the alternative to the epistemic tradition of visibility , namely, the alternative of exposure . *

* Aristotle cannot be confused with Plato, and yet he never became really independent from Plato. His ambiguity arises from the fact that he has two different and incompatible views of the knowing subject--the Platonic contemplator and the vulnerable, exposed agent--and he unwittingly mixes the two. In the beginning of the Metaphysics (first three Lectiones of Aquinas' commentary), in De Motu Animalium , in the Ethics --deliberation, decision, action, ends and means, practical syllogism, enthymeme, in the Rhetoric and the Poetics ) Aristotle deals with the exposed agent as knower. However, he doesn't quite abandon the visibility assumption that comes to him from Plato, and he mixes scientific knowledge or episteme with practical knowledge or prudence. This mixture is very obvious in the mentioned sections of the Metaphysics , where the senses--and especially sight--are given pèle-mèle the disparate functions of (Platonic) contemplation and of (vulnerable exposed) action.        Following Kant's idea of reality as what corresponds to the

transcendental conditions of knowledge, no less than following the Platonic tradition with its totally negative view of the body, of sensibility, of the passions, and of whatever is not purely intelligible and contributing to mere understanding, we unavoidably will exclude from the world by which we are surrounded what is not visible but to be responded to positively or negatively and, as far as the future is concerned, desired or aspired to and, in the measure that it is legitimately possible brought about through action.  

In the Greek speculative epistemic-justificatory tradition knoiwledge is conceived in such a way that it amounts to, terminates in, and is complete by being mere seeing. Whether the knowing subject acts or not is, in this conception of knowledge, irrelevant, for the subject is not more nor less knowing by acting or not acting , nor is the object known as such more or other than being seen. That something is knowable means that it is to be 'seen," and that it is actually known means that it is 'seen' in the particular way that within the given epistemology is taken as a guarantee that what is seen is what is actually the case.

In Kant's case this divorce of knowing from acting is evident . The first Critique is about knowing and has nothing to do with acting, whereas the second which has to do with acting has nothing to do with knowing in the sense defined by the first Critique .

Connected with the assumption of knowledge as visibility is the conception of the real or what is to be known as merely visible, that is, experienciable or intelligible, capable of appearing as seen or heard or smelled or touched or tasted, and finally understood or intuited or sensed with evidence. Now, if the real is equated with the knowable, and the knowable with what is visible, it follows that the real is not something to whose action the knower is exposed and which is itself exposed to the knower's action . * In other words, the real is metaphorically equated with a picture, for a picture like the real is merely to be seen. What characterizes a photo or a picture, though, is that taken as an object it is unreal.

* Only in the modern, post-Galilean scientific tradition are action and causality  focused on as object of inquiry with the purpose of controlling nature. But it is OBSERVED action and causality. The agent's action-passion, the agent's vulnerable exposure to the natural world is systematically ignored.  Here, too, the intentionality of visibility is unidirectional: the scientist intends the real but as a mere contemplator, the scientist is in no way exposed to it nor the real to the scientist.

What I am proposing is another sort of Copernican Revolution, a paradigmatic shift in which the Greek terms of 'visibility' in which we are used to conceive all matters related to knowledge and truth become obsolete. The alternative, in my view, is a return to our insertion in the world as vulnerable agents-patients as factually foundational, which restitutes to life its dramatic seriousness. Beyond that, there are only different cultures, different linguistico-practical-institutional communities with different ideal narratives, the ultimate validity of which cannot be demonstrated; it can only be preached to the members of other cultures and, at the limit, witnessed to.

The first thing to remark is that the Sophists and later the philosophers identify knowledge with sedimented knowledge, with object sensibly or intellectually seen that, when stated , claims to be, or could possibly be, a piece of genuine knowledge, depending on whether or not it is true, that is, resemblant. This image or judgment or statement is what is supposed to represent or be [that is, function as?] a copy of the real object. And, since it is a copy, it is supposed to contain or be constituted exclusively by those traits which are susceptible of similarity, namely, the experientiable-intuible, metaphorically 'visible' traits. Hence the irresistible inclination of the Greek tradition to favor as constituting reality what can be seen , be it by the senses, or by the intellect through ideally necessary predication. Feelings, therefore, become surd, merely subjective, unintentional experiences. Unidirectionality, non-exposure, no-existential-self-reference become the rule . And this applies to Kant in spite of his Copernican revolution. He is as full-fledged a member of the Greek tradition started by the sophists as any other of his predecessors and most of his successors.        

The sophists took something stated-believed by someone to be true, for instance, "The wind is cold," and showed that it had no more title than "The wind is hot" to be taken as true. Hence either there was no genuine knowledge, for truth as correspondence was impossible, or at least whether the correspondence obtained couldn't be known. Hence true for me is what appears to me, that is, what I believe and affirm to be the case, and true for you is what appears to you.

Clearly it was the first crisis of the notion of knowledge as something seen and of thje idea of truth as genuine correspondence between what is seen and assented to and what is actually the case . Since they had no definite alternative, the sophists either actually gave up or seemed by implication to have given up on knowledge and truth, from which skepticism, moral relativiswm, and ultimately cynicism and mere will to power logically had to result . Needless to say, as the champions of knowledge, truth, and morality the philosophers claimed for themselves the beau role. They did  not live up to their claims, though.

As a last resort, Kant gave up the idea of reality in itself and, consequently, the notion of truth as correspondence, though keeping the assumption of visibility. He had the stroke of genius, unlike Hume, of seeing the epistemic subject as active and the known as to be actively constituted rather than passively copied. (This was important for it suggests the agent's contribution-invention in deliberation and decision). However, he persisted in considering the constituted-known as something seen and assented to rather than to be transcended applicatively, and the subject as a contemplator, as an epistemic subject, rather than as an exposed agent patient . *

* New, more modest, beginning:

One of the fundamental questions we humans can and should ask, according to Kant, is "What can I know?" Needless to say, the answer to this question depends on what one assumes that knowing is, and on whether or not one believes that the epistemic subject is capable of living up to the demands of what is to be known. Thus if, with Plato, one assumes that knowledge cannot be knowledge without being absolutely true and certain, and that only eternal, immutable, purely intelligible realities can be object of knowledge so conceived, then either one is constrained to maintain that such realities exist and that the epistemic subject is capable of knowing them, or one has to answer the question "What can I know?" with the word "Nothing." The latter, of course, is not the way in which Plato answered the question because, at least at a certain point in his career as a thinker he seems to have believed that the eternal Forms existed and that they were accessible to certain epistemic subjects called philosophers. Those, however, who would share Plato's assumptions as to what constitutes knowledge and as to the necessity of the existence of eternal immutable realities for knowledge to be possible, but who could not bring themselves to believe that such realities existed or that they can be accessible to an epistemic subject imprisoned in a body would answer Kant's question with a resounding "Nothing." For his part Kant would have disagreed with the latter without, however, agreeing with Plato, for he began with assumptions as to what knowledge is and what is possible to the epistemic subject that are very different from Pato's. Which proves my point: the answer to the question "What can I know?" depends on what one assumes knowledge, reality, and the epistemic subject to be.  

October 10, 1996

BEFORE WORKING OUT THE ALTERNATIVE TO THE GREEK EPISTEMOLOGICAL TRADITION OF 'VISIBILITY' AND TO THE EPISTEMOLOGICAL TRADITION IN GENERAL I WANT TO EXPLORE THE AMBIGUITY OF THE ARISTOTELIAN TRADITION OF PRACTICAL REASON UNDER THE TITLE OF "\WP\96\96-OCT-1".
