---
title: "BIBLE-7"
original_file: "xavier-papers-organized/undated/notes/BIBLE-7"
original_format: WordPerfect document, v5.0
converted_date: 2026-01-18
converted_with: wpd2html + pandoc
topics: []  # To be added
---

\wp\monas\bible-7 Oct. 31, 95

   THIS PAPER CONTINUES AND IS BASED ON "\WP\MONAS\BIBLE-6"

  Faith and Reason: The Epistemological Break

SUMMARY

1 - My purpose (2-4)

2 - The Eclipse: Characteristics (4-12)

3 - The two sources of truth: The machinery for the separation (12-19)

4 - Aquinas's synthesis: His solution to the problems of coordination (19-23)

5 - Revelation and reason: A collision course (23-37)

Augustin (  -30)

6 - Backtracking to Aristotelianism: Aris' epistemology (37-45)

7 - Ambiguities in Aris' notion of knowledge: Sepculative and practical (45-49)

8 - The Aristotelian knower as judging intellect (49-56)

9 - The logic of discovery and of the discovered (56-63)

Not Lonergan's "Deus est" but Pascal's object for response

APPENDIX: FAITH AND APPLICATIVE KNOWLEDGE: TRUTH AS PICTORIAL CORRESPONDENCE ('ORTHODOXY') AND TRUTH AS ORTHOPRAXIS (68-  )  

In Les ruses de l'intelligence: la métis des grecs , Jean-Pierre Vernant and Marcel Detienne agree with Williams [in his recent survey of the history of Greek philosophy] that Greek philosophy fails to give an adequate account of the exposure of human values and human reason to luck; they agree with him that certain very important areas of human life are completely absent from the minds of the philosophers, areas that are better characterized in non-philosophical texts. But there the similarity ends. For while Williams  believes the philosophical tradition to be obseessed with the pursuit of practical self-sufficiency, Detienne and Vernant believe this to be the obsessive aim of their extra-philosophical tradition. THEY ARGUE THAT THERE ARE IN GREEK THOUGHT TWO DISTINCT AND OPPOSED CONCEPTIONS OF HUMAN REASON. THERE IS THE SPECULATIVE REASON OF THE PHILOSOPHERS , WHICH CONCERNS ITSELF WITH STABLE OBJECTS AND WITH ABSTRACT CONTEMPLATION. THIS REASON DOES NOT NEED TO WORRY ABOUT EXPOSURE AND CONTROL, SINCE ITS OBJECTS ARE FROM THE BEGINNING INVULNERABLY STABLE. INDEED, IT HAS NO PRACTICAL CONCERNS AT ALL . (THEY NEVER SUGGEST THAT PRACTICAL WORRIES PROVIDED THE ORIGINAL MOTIVATION FOR THE PHILOSOPHER'S POSITION). ON THE OTHER HAND, THERE IS THE PRACTICAL REASON OF GENERATIONS OF EXTRA-PHILOSOPHICAL TEXTS , A VERSATILE AND RESOURCEFUL TYPE OF INTELLIGENCE THAT CONCERNS ITSELF WITH MUTABLE OBJECTS AND WITH A WORLD OF CONCRETE PARTICULARS . THE GOAL OF THIS TYPE OF REASON, WHICH THEY AWSOCIATE WITH THE WORD ' METIS ' (AS WELL AS WITH RELATED WORDS SUCH AS ' DOLOS ' AND ' TECHNE ') IS USING CLEVER STRATAGEMS, TO SUBDUE AND MASTER THE ELUSIVE OBJECTS OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD . Salient images for this aim are images of hunting and trapping, fishing and snaring, yoking, binding. This account of the aims of extra-philosophical reason resembles Williams' account of the philosopher's goal: what is sought is self-sufficiency, the elimination of the power of ungoverned luck. Detienne and Vernant do insist on the elusivenes of mastery; the images suggest that, even achieved, it will often be unstable and of short duration. But they insist that for the tradition it is reason's single most valued goal and unequivocally fine thing. My account will differ from theirs in two ways" (M. Nussbaum, The Fragility of Goodness , p. 19). My account will differ, too, from the two views sketched above, which are the views of philosophers, on the one side, and sicientists-technicians, on the other. Neither takes the vulnerable agent as central. But it will also differ from Nussbaum's view, which is ambiguous: it wavers between "our prudents" (theoretical relativism) and universal rationality.

"Biblical interpretation became an imperative need, but its direction was that of incorporating extrabiblical thought, experience, and reality into the one real world detailed and made accessible by the biblical story . As Auerbach suggests, in a striking contrast of Homer's Odyssey and Old Testament narrative:

'Far from seeking, like Homer, merely to make us forget our reality for a few hours, it seeks to overcome our reality; we are to fit our own life into its world, feel ourselves to be elements in its structure of universal history... Everything else that happens in the world can only be conceived as an element in this sequence ; into it everything that is known about the world... must be fitted as an ingredient of the divine plan.'

"In the process of interpretation the story itself, constantly adapted to new situations and ways of thinking, underwent ceaseless revision; but in steadily revised form it still remained the adequate depiction of the common and inclusive world until the coming of modernity. As the eighteenth century went on , this mode of interpretation and the outlook it represented broke down with increasing rapidity"  (Hans Frei, The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative , pp. 3-4).

(1) My purpose in this paper

"Sicut liber historiarum solebat legi." In this bitter cry, in the year 12---, --------- condensed his deep regret concerning the sweeping changes that had taken place in the schools of theology during his own lifetime. The changes were sweeping, indeed, of which the shift from a narrative to a non-narrative understanding of the Bible was only a symptom, albeit a mighty important one.

  In a book that became a classic, forty or fifty years ago Chenu analyzed in detail the changes undergone by the theological studies in the first half the thirteenth century. His diagnosis was that what had taken place--precisely within ----------- 's life span--had constituted no less than "an epistemological break" with the past, a true revolution in the field of theological studies. However, unlike X, but like the overwhelming majority of X's contemporaries and successors, Chenu saw that change as a gigantic step forward in the long history of fides quaerens intellectum , a step that was not only going to situate Christianity in the right place to vindicate its own rationality in the scientific world to come about, but a step which was itself powerfully instrumental in bringing about a world in which reason could maintain its appropriate autonomy vis à vis faith.

My intention in this study is double. First, I will attempt to show that the period of the eclipse analyzed by Frei is not, in fact, the initial period of the eclipse but is preceded by another stage. This portion of my study should possess an explanatory power that is missing in Frei, in whose book the occurrence of the eclipse reamins a surd fact. Secondly, it is my intention to reopen the case wrongly settled in the thirteenth ckentury. I propose to show that Aquinas' synthesis of faith and reason, perpetuated by centuries of scholasticism, far from constituting a progress actually institutionalized in the Western world a wrongheaded conception of reason and of rationality--and of the rationality of faith in particular--from whose consequences we are still suffering today.

In this first section of my study, however, my scope will be more modest, though not unrelated to the one just stated. I will limit myself to attemtpting to show the epistemological revolution of the thirteenth century as the first--but also the decisive--step into  "the eclipse of biblical narrative" so much regretted by Hans Frei in his book by the same title. The fact that this epistemological revolution was connected with the rediscovery of the Aristotelian corpus and with a particular reading of Aristotle will, I believe, help us to see that the changes analyzed by Frei that took place beginning with Spinoza and Cocceius in the seventeenth century  are in fact logical, unavoidable developments of the epistemological break that reached its consummation in the thirteenth century.

(2) The eclipse of biblical narrative

As a first step, we need to remember Frei's characterization of the changes that took place between the period preceding the eclipse and the period of the eclipse.   

According to Frei, the essential characteristic of the mentality of Christians before "the eclipse" is that they

"Augustine the most notable among them"--" envisioned the real world as formed by the sequence told by the biblical stories." This vision emerged from a "litteral reading of those parts [of the Bible] which seemed most obviously to demand it . Most eminent among them were all those stories which together went into the making of a single storied or historical sequence" (p. 1). Consequently,

"... since the world truly rendered by combining biblical narratives into one was indeed the one and only real world , it must in principle embrace the experience of any present age and reader. Not only was it possible for him, it was also his duty to fit himself into that world in which he was in any case a member, and he too did so ...in part... by his mode of life ... Biblical interpretation became an imperative need, but its direction was that of incorporating extra-biblical thought, experience, and reality into the one real world detailed and made accessible by the biblical story, not the reverse " (p.3).

"The reverse," that is the incorporation of biblical reality into extra-biblical thought, is what was going to occur at a certain moment under "the eclipse." The first indicator of the new regime, by contrast to the pre-eclipse regime, was

"a kind of detachment of the 'real' historical world from its biblical description. The real events of history constitute an autonomous temporal framework of their own under God's providential design. Instead of rendering them accessible, the narratives heretofore indispensable as means of access to the events, now simply verify them, thus affirming their autonomy and the fact that they are in principle accessible through any kind of description that can manage to be accurate ... * There is now a logical distinction and a reflective distance between the stories and the 'reality' they depict. The depicted biblical world and the real historical world began to be separated at once in thought and in sensibility , no matter whether the depiction was thought to agree with reality... or disagree with it (Spinoza)" (4-5).

[ * The events themselves are now detachable from the biblical narratives. These events, which were previously dramatic scenes, have become isolated facts.  They are actually detached from the biblical narratives by theologians and philosophers--and later by historians. At least some of those events--those that are within the reach of reason left to itself (for historians, those which are not 'trans-historical' like creation or the Trinity) become at least theoretically accessible independently from the biblical narratives. In the latter case, the biblical narratives simply confirm what rational statements-judgments establish as true. In the process, dramatic events that constitute episodes in a narrative become merely observed "facts."]

Yet the world, understood as the whole of reality across time from the beginning to the present, is already acknowledged to be larger than biblical reality, since the latter constitutes only a limited portion of the whole of reality. As a result, it is not anymore a matter of situating everything real within the biblical world, but rather of situating the biblical facts within the whole of reality, of which it is only a portion .

Initially, after the separation, it was still taken for granted that the Bible told the truth . In other words, although the depiction made by the biblical stories and the totality of the real are not seen anymore as identical, nonetheless "it... happens that, ...under God's providence, it is the Bible that contains the accurate descriptions" (4-5). This is to say that, still in an age of faith, in those matters which fall within the field common to revelation and reason, what is reveled is accepted unquestioningly, and what reason has to say is expected to coincide necessarily with the truths revealed.

This represents the first period or moment after "the separation," when people of faith still have the upper hand within the Western culture. Aquinas is typical of this period .

In a second period , however, in an ever more rationally-minded age, the religious obligation to accept as a priori true, that is, as necessarily factual, the central events narrated in the Bible just because they appear in the Bible weakened, while the  critical demand to accept as true only that for which there was irrecusable evidence strengthened correlatively .  

[ Such evolution should not be surprising. In fact, as we shall see, it constitutes a practically unavoidable development, given the nature of the Thomistic synthesis of faith and reason . Indeed, this synthesis explicitly recognized reason as an autonomous source of truth side by side with divine revelation, and as having a large domain for its exercise. Indeed, the synthesis rested on the principle that reason, as a knowing faculty created by God--by the very God who is the author of revelation and who cannot contradict Himself--is capable of reaching the truth by itself when working within its proper domain of knowledge. Now this principle could not be heard but as an invitation to trust reason implicitly and to exploit to the utmost its resources rather than resting content with the comparatively restrained knowledge due to divine revelation, as had to a large extent been the case previously. Actually, Aquinas himself saw the reduction to rational knowledge of the portion of faith that was susceptible of evidence as one of the main functions of the Christian intellectual. )

^(F1) The very idea that certain of the "doctrines" revealed could be brought to evidence or demonstrated whereas others could not, and that once assented to rationally such doctrines could not be "believed" (or be object of faith) anymore, shows conclusively, it seems to me, that Aquinas took seriously that believing is judging (with assent) and that the object of faith is something to be assented to, not to be responded to. Creditum is opposed to scitum understood as seen-with-assent-compelling evidence, not as encountered-with-such-particular-response-requested-by-the-encountered or projected-by-the-subject. N.B. There are different responses: (1) Reflex unmediated by consciousness, (2) Objectless reflex mediated by consciousness of feeling, such as laughing with teased-"cosquillas," or instinctive withdrawal when hurt, (3) Caused instinctive response to object perceived, such as some people respond to mice, (4) Half-caused, projected response under duress, without initiative,

(5) ...

This is what people did, with increasing success, as they gradually gained mastery on their rational abilities. And, of course, the more they succeeded in their endeavor, the more enamorured they became of the way of evidence by contrast to the way of authority, and the more extended and even limitless the proper domain of reason appeared , and the more important the achievements of reason proved to be. As if all that were not enough to begin tipping the balance between faith and reason in favor of the latter in the estimation of the thinking people, the field of knowledge supposedly common to both revelation and reason was, by its very nature, vague and ill-defined, since, apart from a rather limited core of truths obviously inaccessible to reason left to its own devices, even what was and what was not divinely revealed was not absolutely distinct. ]   

Three are clear signs of a further step. For reasons to be explored, the pressure to transform the concrete into the abstract, the temporal into the purely intelligible, dramatic events into brute facts, history into system, was at work .

The reduction of dramatic events to their purely intelligible meaning, which once grasped rendered the events in their temporal-dramatic development superfluous, was one symptom among others. God progressively ceases to be a concrete, singular historical agent (Cullmann would say "the Lord of history" whose kairoi are determinant) to become an idea, a purely intelligible concept--and an explanatory idea at that (If such "phenomenon" or mental presentation "exists" or has an extramental c orrespondent, then God who is not phenomenal has to exist): the God of the proofs , "the God of philosophers."  

Correlatively, the Bible ceases to be primarily narrative , that is, to be read as a narrative, and becomes a book that conveys predicative contents of judgment: either a "doctrine," an intelligible meaning, or at most "facts," rather than dramatic occurrences in a chain of events, episodes in a history. There is a depreciation of (always concrete, particular, and dramatic) narratives and a correlative appreciation of statements whose meaning is either a purely objective (two-dimensional, depthless) fact to be assented to rather than a particular reality to be encountered and responded to appropriately, or a conceptual, purely intelligible, a-temporal doctrine to be understood and assented to.

One of the aspects that the depreciation of narratives assumes is their metaphorical-mythical character . They are not to be read literally, for what they mean is not the events they say or describe, but these events as meaning something else--be it a fact of a higher order or an intelligible doctrine. Consequently, the historicity of the events described is either denied or at least deemed to be irrelevant, since those events are not anyway what the sacred text is about . An indication of this is to be found in Dr. Conneyers's position as presented by Frei:

"Dr. Conyers Midddleton... thought that it didn't matter whether Genesis 1-3 was allegory or fact, since its meaning was the same in either case: that this world had a beginning and creation from God; and that its principal inhabitant, man, was originally formed to a state of happiness and perfection which he lost and forfeited... In other words, whether or not the story is true history, its meaning is detachable from the specific story that sets it forth" (5-6).

The story itself is dispensable, once the meanining is grasped , and it was in fact conceived not as important by itself but only as vehicle of the meaning. Such being the case, stories are for simple-minded people, for the abstract fact or doctrine can be directly grasped by the intelligent ones (see the first question of Aquinas Summa Th ). (This is reminiscent of Hegel's idea of the two approaches to the truth: the narrative-religious for the simple-minded, the intelligible for philosophers). The implicit presupposition is that the dramatic, emotion-provoking, existential depth of narratives is irrelevant, for it is automatically filtered through the atemporal objectification which neutralizes the existential presence of the subject to the object .

Simultaneously with the depreciation of the biblical stories as vehicles of literal-historical [ "factual? dramatic? ] meaning, possessing historical truth, and reinforcing that very trend, many of the biblical stories came to be seen in this more rationally sophisticated age as portraying an undignified God who represented the childish conceptions of a primitive people and who was very much at odds with the  majestic, absolutely transcendent (indeed, purely conceptual) "Supreme Being" to which rational thought gave access.

In the age of faith that preceded the confrontation with the Aristotelian corpus the truth of the biblical narratives had been taken for granted as a matter of course. Or, rather, the question of truth as such did not even arise concerning the biblical text. For the biblical text itself in its privileged narrative portions, which were read or listened to realistically, that is, in terms of exposure, gave access to the events by which history was constituted. The text was not read as a text; it disappeared in its very giving access, much as the spectacles disappear in their very giving access. There was no reflective distance between what the text said and the historical events; the text gave access to the historical events in relation to which Christians situated themselves as exposed participants, not as as curious contemplators . Thus, in a sense, the Bible--divine revelation--did not function as a source of truth, certainly not of truth stated which could therefore appropriately be object of theoretical dispute. The notion itself of the two sources of truth could appear only when there was a vision (that is, an explicit theory of viewing and an object viewed) that was not coextensive at all points with the biblical vision. When the two vieweds were objectively held before the eyes, heard as statements of 'truths,' and superposed, they naturally had to be found, contrary to Aquinas' desperate hope, not to coincide with each other and the biblical "facts" not to live up to the standards of Aristotelian reason.  

(3) The two sources of truth

To the question whether there is any room for the use of reason within the realm of faith Aquinas and his immediate predecessors unanimously answered that traditionally reason had been used in connection with faith in several ways ---------------They were quite right. In fact, a long tradition of what today we call rational argument had existed within the Church, a tradition instantiated very early by Saint Paul in his argument with the Athenians about the unknown God. Thus, to think that the revolution that took place between the twelfth and the thirteenth centuries consisted simply in making room for reason within faith, as if until then reason understood in a non-technical, non-Aristotelian sense had found no place within faith, does not stand scrutiny.

It is true that there had been throughout the history of the Church a few people who, intent in defending the self-sufficiency of divine revelation, had rejected any use of reason as superfluous or even harmful and disrespectful to divine revelation, and had dismissed the extrabiblical wisdom of the pagans as futile or even dangerous. In these people's eyes, either nothing could be known but through divine revelation, or at least nothing useful, and needed for, salvation--and what was not useful for salvation swas of no value to them. Most certainly, however, such had not been either the commonly accepted or the official position of the Church.

Thus, it cannot seriously be maintained that what the encounter with the Aristotelian corpus introduced was the aceptance of reason for the first time in the history of Christianity. What it introduced was a totally new and technical notion of reason which eventually came to prevail, to wit: reason as an autonomous source of knowledge side by side with divine revelation, as a fully legitimized or guaranteed source of knowledge (and, at least potentially, as the only legitimate source of knowledge) . Until then, there had been no notion of reason as a sort of partner of divine revelation, as standing in relation to revelation as a complementary source of knowledge of reality, much less of reason understood in the technical sense of the Posterior Analytics being that partner. This, of course, is the notion of reason (and, consequently, of revelation) that Aquinas took for granted. Until then, by contrast, reason was "baptized reason," so to say, that is, the reason of those who lived and participated in the only history there was, which was sacred history. [SEE PAGES 32-33 BELOW].

To understand this new notion of reason it might be helpful to begin with Frei's formulation of one of the fundamental points of contrast between the pre-eclipse and the eclipse periods. Before the eclipse, according to Frei's analysis, there was no "logical distinction," no "reflective distance," no "separation" between reality and the world of the Bible . In other words, being real was synonymous with having a place within the world depicted by the Bible, for the Bible constituted people's "access to reality." Hence, if reason had a job to do-- and it did--its job could not conceivably be done but in reference to biblical reality. This is why, in De Magistro , Augustine finds it quite natural to subordinate instrumentally all disciplines to theology, that is, to the study of the word of God, to the study of what is revealed.

In this view, then, that is, in the Christian implicit rather than thematic understanding of reality that prevailed before the rediscovery and assimilation of the Aristotelian corpus, the very notion of the autonomy of reason, which to us appears as axiomatic, was literally inconceivable. On the contrary, what was axiomatic was that reason is the servant or hand-maiden of faith--"ancilla fidei" (?) . Now, if we succeed in understanding this revolutionary shift in the status of reason from servant to master --first to master within its own house which coexisted with, and limited and was limited by, the house of faith, later and finally to absolute master within its own house which was the only existing house and within which at best there could be room for faith only as a servant--we will have understood the eclipse of biblical narrative. ( N.B. In the process of defining "reason" there are two steps. (1) Objectification, that is, reduction of object of exposure grasped applicatively by the participant to content of judgment. (2) Conception of this content as image of reality--which by the same token becomes a to be assented to, a to be known theoretically rather than a to be responded to applicaktivkely--and definition  of conditions (objective and subjective) under which assent genuinely corresponds to the real) .

^(F2) Notice the parallel with (Greek) philosophy before the advent of Christianity. From the philosophers' point of view, given their presuppositions, there could not be--and there was not--a problem of faith and reason. For Plato ' doxa ', that is, "belief", assent without necessity-universality, led to illusion, not to knowledge. Hence, either the customary gods, or any other divinity, could be object of scientific knowledge (that is, of knowledge tout court (for only scientific knowledge was knowledge for Plato), or it was not real. Reason, therefore, was the ultimate court of appeal to which the object of faith was subject. Though Aristotle softened Plato's demand for necessity-intelligibility, he created other demands. In other words, he did not go as far as to accept the customary, the purely d oxaston , as knowledge. For him, too, the object of faith stood or fell according to its capacity to live up to the demands of what he conceived as reason. (Whether or not there was a problem of faith and reason for the pious Greeks exposed to the philosophers --Eutyphros could be an example--, it depends on whether or not they accepted as normative the strictures of the philosophers concerning what is to count for knowledge, and whether or not, having accepted them, they were confronted by philosophers with 'realities' that contradicted their dogmas, if they had any dogmas at all.

As the first symptom of the eclipse Frei mentions a detachment ofthe world of reality from the biblical world . As to what provoked this ominous "detachment"? What made possible this "logical distinction," this "reflective distance" between the biblical stories and reality, no explanation at all is furnished by Frei. In his account this event remains a surd . Yet, there must be an explanation. Something must have happened to precipitate such a significant change. It is my thesis that something did indeed happen, and that it happened in the thirteenth century, long before the period covered by Frei's analysis. To this I turn now.

Like all the main theological textbooks of the preceding thirty years, starting with the Sumnma Aurea of ------------?,

Aquinas's Summa Theologica opens with the issue of the scientific character of theology.

^(F3) This quaestion could not be raised but in reference to the Greeks and to Aris in particular, for only they conceived of knowledge as "scientific" by contrast to non-scientific. This indicates that Aquinas has already adopted the Aristotelian standard of knowledge as indisputable and is going to show the impossible, namely, that the Christian faith lives up tp that standard.

What is distinctive-- (?) check this --in Aquinas's treatment of the issue is that, in the very first article of his monumental work he, as if it were a matter of course without consequences for the status of faith, takes the position that there are two relatively coequal and, within its respective realms--autonomous sources of truth: reason--"the philosophical disciplines investigated by reason"--and revelation--"it was necessary for man's salvation that there should be a doctrine revealed by God" (translation Pegis).

The machinery for the "separation" or "logical distinction" to which Frei refers between the realities to which the Bible gives access and the world of reality is already in place. Indeed, neither is divine revelation the only way of access to reality, nor is the portion of reality accessed through each of the sources of knowledge identical. Reason deals with the portion of reality that is accessible to it by its own natural strength, whereas "certain truths exceed human reason" and therefore can only be made known to man "by divine revelation." (In the middle there is a grey zone--particularly grey after and because of the weakening of human reason by the original sin, which sometimes makes useful the revelation concerning things which are rationally accessible--constituted in part by those truths that are actually revealed but are nevertheless accessible to reason left to its own devices. Another category are the praeambula fidei , that is, those truths--whether they are actually revealed, as God's existence, or not revealed explicitly, as the ability of people to know the truth--which, if they were inaccessible to reason left to its own devices, would leave the knowledge acquired trough revelation foundationless, and would therefore make the assent of faith purely fideistic rather than rational --a rationale obsequium ).

Now, when one thinks of it, no less striking than the affirmation of the two sources is the matter-of-factness with which, in the very first article of the Summa , this affirmation is made, which will result in the "separation" or "detachment" of 'the two realities' (and ultimately in the collision between faith and reason and in the supremacy of reason. Obviously, the author of the Summa finds it perfectly natural and unproblematic. Also noteworthy is the fact that, as indicated by the title of the article, what the author deems to be in need of some sort of demonstration is not that reason is a source of knowledge, but that revelation is a source of knowledge side by side with reason. "There had to be..."

Why are these features striking? Because they show that Aquinas has already been coopted into, and actually inhabits, a different universe of discourse from that of his Christian predecessors . Now there are two sources of knowledge, that is, two ways of access to reality, whereas previously revelation constituted the way of access to reality.

^(F4) This needs refining. Wasn't reason the servant of faith? Were'nt the secular disciplines subordinated to theology? (Notice: to theology. But is faith really a discipline, however sacred?). And does not subordination imply duality? Indeed. But what is different is that Aquinas' predecessors subordinated reason to faith--for them it was the only conceivable solution to the problems of coordination insofar as they were aware of such problems--and did not fear fideism as the worst enemy of faith. Their trust was trust in God, and it was real trust, without prejustifying evidence. Moreover, to repeat myself, the word "fideism"--fi such a concept had existed, which I doubt (?), could not mean for them what it means for us after Aquinas, for it presupposes a foundationalist conception of knowledge, of which the Platonic as well as the Aristotelian epistemologies are varieties. .

Aquinas's formulation seems to imply that reason as a source of knowledge possesses a certain primacy over revelation. Of course the primacy in question is not of importance but, so to say, of obviousness and connaturality because, unlike faith, it involves vision. In other words, not only has reason become a recognized source of knowledge side by side with divine revelation, but the fact that reason is a source of knowledge on its own right is taken for granted as self-evident,  whereas the fact that revelation is a source of knowledge side by side with reason needs to be somehow argued for on the basis of the need we have of it. In this regard, the title of the article is revealing. What needs to be established is not that reason is a source of knowledge, but that, in addition, there has to be divine revelation of the knowledge required for man's salvation.

(4) Aquinas's synthesis of faith and reason and the problems of coordination

As soon as two sources of knowledge are recognized, a special sort of problems of coordination has to be faced . Is reason subordinated to revelation or independent from revelation? Is the domain of reason the same as, or different from, the domain of revelation? Can the knowledge acquired through the use of reason contradict the knowledge received from revelation, or are there two independent kinds of truths? Do the realities accessed through the two sources constitute one world or two different worlds? What is usually identified as "Aquinas's synthesis of faith and reason" is constituted by his particular solution to the problems of coordination that arise as soon as reason is explicitly acknowledged as a source of knowledge aside from divine revelation. Let us see how Aquinas actually saw and solved them.

^(F5) Problems of this kind, which under the pre-eclipse regime had not existed as problems or at least had not been central in the Christian consciousness, become acute. By contrast, as long as reason had not been identified as an independent source of knowledge with a domain of its own, reason's function could not be other than working on the basis of the data of revelation, or at least at the service of revelation. In other words, the ancillary character of reason in relation to revelation did not constitute a problem at all. Conceivably, it could be asked whether reason was subordinated to faith or at most subordinated to faith in part, and in part autonomous within its proper domain. But it could not be asked whether faith was subordinated to reason. Faith preempts reason, and baptized reason submits itself to faith. The same, though in the inverse way, applied to Aristotelian reason. It could not conceivably be asked whether reason was subordinated to faith. It could not even be asked whether faith was in part autonomous within its proper domain, for there was no conceivable domain beyond the domain of reason, given that reason and reality are correlates in such a way that whatever is real is rational, that is, knowable, accessible to reason left to its own devices .    

Aquinas sees revelation as the way of access to the knowledge that is necessary or at least useful for salvation, whereas reason is the way of access to all other knowledge. Each of them, therefore, has its own proper domain, and each of them, reason as much as revelation, is autonomous within its proper domain. However, there is a grievous complication. Certain truths which are revealed, and therefore related to man's salvation, are nonetheless, according to Aquinas, also accessible to reason left to its own devices. Such is the case of at least the " praeambula fidei ," such as the fact of God's existence.

^(F6) The name "praeambula fidei" is significant . Doesn't it suggest that there are necessary rational foundations to faith, as the fact of God's existence, without which faith would be rationally unacceptable? Of course, the ignorant or simpleminded may believe on the basis of revelation. But what about an intelligent, reflective Christian who would find the proofs of God's existence unsatisfactory? Would Aquinas find faith acceptable without rational praeambula? Is this not the reason why for him the proofs are vital? Indeed, if the proofs fail, then the assent of faith is ultimately blind. [N.B.- Did any of Aquinas's contemporaries speak of praeambula fidei? I don't think so. If now, did they have a conception of fideism as a mortal enemy of faith ?].

In that case, can the truths discovered by reason contradict the truths revealed? What happens if ever the truths discovered by reason are not in harmony with the truths revealed? Is reason entitled to proceed on its own, without heeding to revelation, when it is working within its proper domain, that is, within the field of knowledge which is naturally accessible to it without any revelation, but when at the same time it is working within the area that is common to it with revelation?

This is Aquinas's dictamen. Reality, as Aristotle conceives of it, by definition, what is knowable. In this sense, therefore, there is only one reality. However, not all of it is accessible to human intelligence left to its own devices. Since God is both the author of revelation and the creator of human reason, there is no possibility of two different truths or of real contradiction between revelation and reason. Moreover, since God who created human reason endowed it with the ability to know--that is, to attain reality--when it works within its proper natural domain, reason is autonomous within those limits. It may happen, however, when reason works within its proper natural limits but in the area common to it and to revelation that reason reaches conclusions that differ from the knowledge revealed by God. However, any genuine contradiction between revelation and reason is impossible, since there is only one sphere of reality and human reason is created by God. Thus, the contradiciton can only be apparent. In addition, divine revelation cannot possibly be in error, but reason can. Therefore, in case of apparent contradiction between what God has revealed and what reason has grasped as true, reason ought to recognize its natural weakness, refuse assent to its own conclusions, and assent to what God has revealed. In the short or the long run, reason will come to detect how its error occurred and will on its own reach a conclusion that coincides with the knowledge revealed.

By now we can see clearly the way in which, acording to Aquinas, the knowledge obtained through each of the two sources is coordinated. There is only one order of reality. A portion of it can be attained only through revelation, for it is beyond the natural capacity of human reason. The rest of reality can be known through reason, though a limited portion of the reality naturally acessible to reason is also accessed through revelation.

As it should be obvious by now, everything is modified significantly under the regime of the two sources of knowledge. Indeed, since the portion of reality accessed through revelation and the portion of reality accessed through reason are for the most part not the same, the "detachment" of "the real historical world from its biblical depiction," to use Frei's words, has become higly visible. Now the biblical depiction embraces only a portion of the whole of reality. In addition, whereas under the previous regime everything real had to find its place within the revealed world, now revelation shares with reason that title .

Aquinas' so-called "synthesis of faith and reason" as well as his specific solution to what I have called the problems of coordination has particular importance in that it happened, as a matter of historical fact, to end up gaining the official support of the Catholic authorities as well as the common allegiance of professional theologians and of those Catholic intellectuals who reflected at all on that kind of problems. Yet, it is important for my purposes to highlight our awareness that Aquinas's solution to the problems of coordination has historically had its own attendant problems, by ignoring which we might have much to lose. A brief historical survey of them will prove helpful.

(5) Revelation and reason: A collision course (SEE BELOW, "THE ARISTOTELIAN KNOWER AS A JUDGING INTELLECT," PP. 49 FF.)

Revelation as a source of knowledge relied on authority, whereas reason relied on evidence (sufficient reason). Now, knowledge as conceived by Aristotle was precisely the opposite of authority or mere custom, so that it emplicitly excluded the revealed as knowledge. Furthermore Aquinas himself acknowledged that vision--which we will have in heaven--is the natural prompter of assent, thereby implicitly granting that there is something unnatural to faith, whose object is to be reduced as much as possible even on earth by bringing to evidence (that is, to knowledge) what is object of faith. Thus, from the fact that reason relies on evidence and faith on authority, not only was there a tension between reason and faith, but reason had the upper hand snce it was the natural way to know. Hence, if ever the tension was to be broken, it had to result in the triumph of reason, not of faith.

Insofar as both revelation and reason, in Aquinas's synthesis, are seen as parallel ways of access to reality with a partially common area, the potential for conflict between both was an inherent feature of the synthesis. Aquinas himself acknowledged it when he declared the conflict merely apparent .

THIS KIND OF CONFLICT, HOWEVER, THOUGH REAL, AS DEMONSTRATED IN THE CASES OF SIGER OF BRABANT AND OF GALILEO, IS SUPERFICIAL COMPARED TO THE DEEP INTERNAL CONFLICT BETWEEN TWO MUTUALLY INCOMPATIBLE (BECAUSE ALL-EMBRACING, AUTONOMOUS, EQUALLY SOVEREIGN) ORDER S OF KNOWLEDGE , AMD BETWEEN TWO RADICALLY HETEROGENEOUS (BECAUSE ONE IS REFLECTIVE AND OBJECTIVE, WHEREAS THE OTHER IS PARTICIPATORY) CONCEPTIONS OF REALITY. IN THE LATTER CASE RATHER THAN OF CONFLICT WE SHOULD SPEAK OF ALTERNATIVE VIEWS OF REALITY, REPRESENTED IN WHAT FOLLOWS BY THE TRADITIONALISTS ON THE RIGHT AND THE PHILOLSOPHES OF THE ENLIGHTNEMENT ON THE LEFT.

First, there were those traditionalists who simply rejected the notion of the two at least partially autononomous sources of knowledge IN THE NAME OF THE TOTALITARIAN CHARACTER OF FAITH AND OF ITS INHERENT ABSOLUTE SUPERIORITY, INCOMPATIBLE WITH BEING JUDGED BY REASON. These people clung to the old, Augustinian view of the total subordination of all the disciplines to theology that is, to faith.

^(F7) ON AUGUSTINE: Fides quaerens intellectum

An example of this is the De Trinitate , according to Henri-Irenee Marrou, Saint Augustin et la fin de la culture antique , Editions E. de Boccard, Quyatrieme edition, Paris 1958, pp. 315-327; especially, p. 325). And notice that the second section of ch. 1  of Part III of Marrou's book is entitled: "De lui-meme comme des autres, il exige une complete subordination de la culture a la religion" (ibid. pp. 339-345).

The following quote is interesting: "... une lettre de direction que saint Aug ecrivit... a un etudiant grec, Dioscore; a lui comme a Licentius il demande de subordonner etroitement toutes ses etudes, tous ses travaux aux exigences de la religion xtienne . - Ne commettons pas la grave erreur d'interpreter ces texts dans une atmosphere ignacienne ou thomiste: tous doivent s'etendre au sens fort; il ne s'agit pas seulement pour Aug de consacrer a Dieu la vie intellectuelle, d'une facon generale et en somme exterieure, par un simple acte d'hommage, un redressement de l'intention, des prieres d'offrande ou d'action de graces; il faut la faire servir, la ramener a une contribution directe a la vie religieuse. D'autre part on ne percoit nulle part le souci de definir sur le plan theorique un ordre de valeurs proprement humaines, naturelles, distinctes (au moins en droit) de l'ordre surnaturel. Tout est violemment ramene a l'unique necessaire . - Je ne cherche pas ici a imposer au lecteur une impression personnelle; saint Aug a exprime sa doctrine sur ce sujet avec toute la precision, toute la rigueur desirables. Nous la trouvons enoncee en particulier dans le traite sur la culture xtienne, De Doctrina Xtiana . Et d'abord tout au long du livre I:... celui-ci se presente comme une vaste introduction qui vise a determiner la place et le role du travail intellectuel dnas l'ensemble de la vie xtienne" [suit l'analyse de cet ouvrage] ((pp. 342-343). And on p. 345: "La culture augustinienne ne sera pas seulement subordonnee a la vie religieuse par son objet, son programme, mais encore par l'esprit qui l'animera: il ne suffit pas de consacrer l'effort de son intelligence a un objet d'essence religeuse, en l'espece a l'etude des saintes Ecritures. L'etude ne doit pas etre poursuivie pour elle-meme, mais etre soigneusemanent subordonnee au progres de l'ame vers la perfection; on peut passer son temps a scruter les temoginages du Seigneur et cependant rester 'des ouvriers d'iniquite,' si l'on cherche plus la science que la saintete ." And p. 347:  "Relisant poor les Retractations le De Ordine , le vieil eveque d'Hippone s'inquiete du magnifique eloge qu'il discernait aux arts liberaux, 'car dit-il, tant de saints les ont ignores, et tels qui les possedent ne sont pas des saints'. "

On p. 352, and also footnotes, allusion a la tradition rigoriste qui exclue toute valeur non directement xtienne: les adversaires de Clement et d'Origene, et apres eux Tertullien, des reformateurs comme saint Pierre Damien au XII s., saint Bernard au XIIe et, en plein XVIIe s. Rancé, le milieu de Port-Royal et Bossuet." P. 352, note 2: "... chacun des renouveaux de la spiritualite intransigeante correspond plus ou moins a une periode ou le developpement excessif d'un ordre de valeurs humaines pouvait faire courir des dangers a la vie religieuse." P. 364: "Or, pour un intellectuel , {NOTE: Sur ce mot on pourrait accrocher la discussion d'un probleme difficile que je ne pretend pas resoudre ici: st Aug a-t-il admis la possibilite d'une autre contemplation que celle dy type philosophique? A-t-il reconnu une contemplation mystique plus affective que rationnelle et accessible aux 'simples'? Butler croit que oui (Western Mysticism, p. 241-2, citant la Lettre 120, 1, 4, P. L. t. XXXIII, c. 54)}. Aug ne voit qu'un type de vie contemplative possible, c'est celui qui consiste a s'elever par la raison a la comprehension de la verite divine definie, et connue par ailleurs par la foi; c'est cette mystique philosophique dont, des l'automne de Cassiciacum, St Aug avait si nettement entrevu le caractere et defini les conditions . Ecrivant en 416 ou 417 l'avant derniere page du De Trinitate , il n'en parlera pas d'une maniere tres differente de celle dont des 386 il parlait dans le De Ordine : 'Et certe cum inconcusse crediderint Scripturis Sanctis tamquam veracissimis testibus, agant orando et quaerendo et bene vivendo, et intelligant, i.e., ut quantum videri potest, videatur mente quod tenetur fide .' Cette phrase... resume toute la doctrine augustinienne de la sagesse: necessite de la foi, effort pour s'elever a l'intelligence des verites, contemplation, limitee de celle-ci sur la terre; triple aspect de la vie contemplative: priere, etude, morale. - Sans doute entre l'image qu'Aug se fait du studium sapientiae a Hippone et celle qui'il s'en faisait a Cassiciacum il y a des nuances." P.182: A Cassiciacum: " Celui-la verra Dieu qui bene studet: la partie faite a la grace et a la vertu, il reste que l'acquisition de la sagesse est essentiellement le fruit d'une activite d'ordre rationnel. - Cette activite est double. Et d'abord la possession de la verite beatifiante, qui definit la sagesse, suppose son acquisition. Il faut retrouver, atteindre par un effort constructif de la raison, les verites dont la nature et l'existence nous sont suggerees par la foi. Cet effort est concu par Aug sous une forme nettement philosophique. Sans doute il marque bien que la connaissance qu'il espere avoir un jour de Dieu sera beacupoup plus riche que la connaissance rationnelle, dont les mathematiques p. ex. peuvent nous donner l'experience; mais le type de connaissance restera le meme: certitude egale, egale intelligibilite" {Note 2: Cf. p. ex. Soliloques , 1, 4 (10)}. Se reporter a l'analyse si nuancee de Gilson, Introduction a l'etude de St Augustin , Paris 1909, pp. 8-10).

PP. 357-8: "Le point le plus delicat va etre ivci de determiner le rapport entre les deux conceptions augustiniennes de la culture, entre celle d'Hippone et celle...de Cassiciacum: ce rapport n'es ni identite, ni opposition, c'est une relation de tout a partie. - Je crois etre en mesure d'etablir que le point de vue definitif de st Aug sur la culture presente un double aspect; d'une part, il ne renonce pas au type de culture philosophique que nous avons etudie; mais d'autre part, en realisant davantage son caractere exceptionnel, il en vient a concevoir un autre type de vie et de formation intellectuelle, qui lui apparait comme la culture xtienne normale, celle qui convient a la grande majorite des fideles susceptibles d'un certain developpment intellectuel. "

PP. 363: St Aug n'a cesse de definir son ideal par ce meme terme de sapientia; et la sagesse poour lui est toujours restee une contemplation de la verite, une connaissance de Dieu, connaissance qui est sans doute vision, contact, amour, participation, mais avant tout certitude : 'sapientia id est conemplatio veritatis, pacificans totum hominem et suscipiens similitudinem Dei' (De Sermmone Domini in Monte, 1, 3, (10). ]

P. 366: Un texte permet de saisir le contraste entre les deux periodes. Dans le De Doctrina Xtiana St Aug est amene a exposer la doctrine de purification interieure qui permettra a l'ame d'entrer en contact avec la sagesse, et reprennant dans une perspective tres analogue l'enseignement du de Ordine il mentionne les trois elements que nous avons appris a distinguer. Mais la morale et l'etude ne sont mentionnees cette fois que d'un mot... et il developpe longuement les conditions surnaturelles de notre acces a la sagesse: l'Incarnation, la Passion, la Resurrection du Xt; l'Eglise, son ministere sacramentel, etc. - Alors que le de Ordine ne parlait que de la necessite de la priere qu'en passant... - Ce n'est plus un catechumene, c'est un pretre, un eveque qui parle... - Mkais la morale et la priere sont demandees indistinctement a tous les fideles, quel que soit leur degre de perfection. Quelque relief qu'acquierent desormais ces deux elements, c'est toujours le troisieme, l'element intellectuel qui donne a la sapientia ses traits specifiques, et il reste substantiellement tel que nous l'avons defini. - A une nuance pres:  st Aug n'iniste plus autant sur l'utilite de la culture scientifique; nous ne retrouvons pas, dans la lettre a Dioscore p. example, l'equivalent de l'appel qu'Augustin addressait a ses auditeurs du De Ordine en faveur des sept arts liberaux.

Je crois qu'il s'agit d'un retentissement de la pratique sur la theorie . Nous avons mesure les lacunes de la formation scientifique d'Aug, nos savons qu'a Hipponne il dut renoncer a les combler. Pratiquement la philo d'Aug est fondee sur une culture litteraire et sur la dialectique. Il ne pouvait pas continuer a recommander comme indispensables des connaissances dont, dans la pratique quotidienne, sa pensee reussissait for bien a se passer .

P. 368: " Il y a donc un premier point assure: st Augustin n'a pas cesse de reserver dans ses projets de culture xtienne une place, la premiere place, a la culture philosophique, a la sapientia. Mais, et c'est l'innovation capitale, cette culture n'est plus pour lui la seule legitime, la seule concevable . Nous connaissons le point de vue tres etroit auquel Aug, dans la premiere ferveur de sa conversion philosophique, s'arretait a Cassiciacum. Il n'y avait pas lors pour lui que deux attitudes possibles: celle du philosophe qu'il cherchait a devenir; celle des simples, que representait alors aupres de lui Monique . Le premier, partant de la foi, cherchant a s'elever vers Dieu par la raison; les seconds se contentant de la seule foi . - Attitude qui, au point de vue religieux, n'avait certes rien de meprisant pour les simples: grace a sa mere, st Aug avait pu connaitre quelle grandeur spirituelle peut etre la leur. {Note 1: Cf le texte decisif: Soliloques, 1, 13: 'nam sunt nonnulli oculi tam sani et vegeti, qui se mox ut aperti fuerint in ispum solem (:Dieu) sine ulla trepidatione convertant. His quodammodo ipsa lux sanitas est, nec doctore indigent, sed sola fortasse admonitione. His credere, sperare, amare satis est. ' Aug leur oppose dans la suite (PL, t. XXXII, c. 881-2) les intellectuels qui ont besoin de la culture philosophique : 'alii vero... exercendi sunt prius.' Il y a donc deux voies pour parvenir a la sagesse, entendons la sagesse dont on jouit en Paradis (c'est le sens obvie de la phrase: 'sed non ad eam (sapientiam) una via parvenitur' incriminee dans les Retractations 1, 4, 3, PL t/. xxxII, c. 590). Je ne saurais admettre avec Alfaric que pour Aug le xtianisme n'est qu'une forme inferieure de philo, bonne tout au plus pour le peuple (L'evolution intellectuelle de st Aug. I. Du Manicheisme au Neoplatonisme (seul paru), Paris, 1918, pp. 525-6: 'Jesus est le Platon des foules.' (On Alfaric, see. pp. 628-631). Il respecte trop sa mere pour mepriser sa forme de vie spirituelle (cf. De Ordine, 1, 11 (31). c/ 992-3; 1, 17 (45). c. 1015-6).; il semble considerer plutot parfois la vocation philosophique, vocation dangereuse, difficile encore qu'irresistible, comme une sorte de maladie, d'infirmite (au texte cite en tete de cette note joindre de Quantitate Animae, 7, (12), ibid., c. 1041-2; ceci dans la mesure ou il realise nettemente (et on le sait dans cette periode ou sa pensee etait en pleine evolution il ne le fait pas toujours), QUE LA VERITABLE SAGESSE N'EST ATTEINTE QU'APRES LA MORT, ET QUE PAR CONSEQUENT LA MEDITATION DU PHILOSOPHE N'Y ATTEINT PAS ENCORE. Mais s'il leur recconnait la saintete, il leur refuse la culture. {Note 2: La saintete mais non pas la contemplation. Encore une fois je reserve la question de savoir si st Aug a admis l'experience mystique des simples; a Cassiciacum il me parait assure qu'il ne la concevait pas comme possible: voir le texte si net du De Ordine 2, 9 (16 fin), c. 1007)}. Il n'admet pas d'autre culture que celle qui conduit a la sapientia a travers toute une serie d'etudes scientifiques. On se souvient de la brutale formule: 'aut ordine illo eruditionis, aut nullo modo' ( De Ordine 2, 17 (46). - C'est que St Aug etait alors asservi aux cadres de la civilisation antique; il ne concevait que deux types possibles de vie intellectuelle...: celui du rheteur, celui du philosophe . Le premier ecarte, il ne restait plus que le second. A Hippone, nous constatons que saint Aug a fait eclater ces cadres trop rigides . - C'est le De Trinitate qui nous permet le mieux de saisir son nouveau point de vue" [distinction entre sapientia et scientia, et entre bon et mauvais usage de scientia : See notes on pp. 372-375]... PP. 373-4: Au debut du livre XIV du De Trinitate , avant de passer a l'etude de la sapientia, il recapaitule et recueille en quelques formules decisives le fruit des analyses que le livre precedent avait consacre a scientia : 'J'ai donc attribue a la science non pas indistinctement toutes les connaissances humaines, ou entrent tant de vain superflu et dangereuse curiosite, mais cette connaissance seulement qui fait naitre, qui nourrit, defend et fortifie la foi salutaire par laquelle on parvient a la vraie beatitude. La plupart des fideles ne possedent pas cette science, quelle que soit par ailleurs l'intensite de leur foi. Autre chose en effet est de savoir simplement ce que l'homme doit croire pour obtenir la beatitude eternelle; autre chose de savoir comment apporter ce meme contenu de la foi aux ames pieuses et le defendre contre les impies; c'est a ce second aspect qu'avec st Paul (I Cor, 12, 8) on doit proprement reserver le terme de science ." - Il faut peser tous les termes de ce texte... - A Cassiciacum la foi etait pour Aug un donne brut; il l'admettait, plus encore l'exigeait, mais ce n'etait pour lui qu'un point de depart, il ne jugeait pas necessaire de s'y arreter. - L'approfondissement de la notion de foi lui a fait decouvrir qu'il y a tout un ordre d'activites de l'esprit, toute une culture qui est possible, legitime, necessaire, et qui doit s'organiser autour de la fides, en fonction de celle-ci. - On demande a tous les fideles la meme adhesion pleine et sincere au Credo, a la doctrine de l'Eglise. Mais a l'intellectuel xtien, a celui qui est susceptible de mettre l'activite de son intelligence au service de la foi, on doit demander davantage ."

P. 376: Si nous cherchons maintenant a voir de maniere concrete comment cette scientia, cette culture xtienne se traduira dnas les faits, nous arriverons vite a tracer son programme. Celui qui veut approfondir le contenu de la foi doit remonter a sa source. Celle-ci est triple: l'ecriture, la tradition, l'autorite vivante de l'Eglise (see note 1, p. 376: Sur les sources de la foi selon Aug cf les textes rassembles par Portalié, article "St Aug", Dictionnaire de Theo Catholique , t. I, cc. 2258-2472, pp 2340-2341; Batiffol, Catholicisme , pp. 21 ss). Mais l'enseignement de l'Eglise, comme celui de la tradition sur laquelle il s'appuie, n'est qu'une transmission scrupuleuse du donne revele. Or la revelation, toute la revelation, est contenue dans L'Ecriture sainte... C'est donc autour de la Bible que doit graviter toute la science, toute la culture xtienne ;... on peut dire que l'etude de la Bible constitue l'objet propre de cette culture. - Une telle definition peut a premiere vue sembler etroite; il faut savoir pourtant qu'elle a longtemps semble satisfaisante. En plein XIIe s toute la haute culture s'organise encore autour du commentaire de la sacra pagina. Abelard qui le premier tente une vaste synthese theologique n'ose la presenter que comme une "introduction a l'Ecriture sainte" (See note 1: De Ghellinck, Mouvement Theol, 9, 34, 66, 77; Dialectique et Dogme, p. 79 ss.; Chenu  Theologie comme science; Cottiaux, Theologie chez Abelard, p. 269, n. 2; Pare-Brunet-Tremblay, Rennaissance du XIIe siecle). Ce n'est plus alors il est vrai qu'une survivance, une definition traditionnelle, qui ne reponds plus au contenu reel de l'enseignement et de la science. Et sans doute deja au temps de st Aug les etudes xtiennes debordent le cadre de l'exegese proprement dite, de l'explication pure et simple du livre sacre. Il est necessaire de le noter ici brievement. - La theo n'a pas acquis chez st Aug l'autonomie de fait et de droit que le XIIIe s devait lui reconnaitre. La speculation sur le dogme, l'effort pour elalborer rationnelllement le donne revele, sont cependant chez lui assez avances pour se detacher du commentaire biblique, beaucoup plus nettement que ce n'etait le cas chez Origene par ex. Si nous feuilletons les douze livres du de Genesi ad litteram nous constatons que le commentaire proprement dit est sans cesse interrompu par une proliferation de quaestiones theologiques qui, a propos du texte sacre, mais en marge de celui-ci, discutent pour lui-meme un point de doctrine. - Ici cependant un lien, au moins virtuel, les relie a l'exegese; mais ce lien ailleurs peut etre rompu. De propos delibere st Aug a ecrit toute une serie de traites de pure theologie; il s'est meme risque a esquisser des exposes systematiques de l'ensemble du contenu de la foi... - Mais des questions particulieres ont fait l'objet de sa part de recherches approfondies...- Il s'agit la de theologie dogmatique; nous assistons aussi au developpement de la theologie morale.  ... une serie de traites, nourris sans doute d'erudition biblique, mais detaches de toute exegese proprement dite. - On sait quel fut, surtout pour la dogmatique, le moteur essentiel de ce developpement theologique: c'est la proliferation de l'heresie... - Theologie, controverse, apologetique, tout cela n'est qu'une mise en oeuvre ou une defense de la Bible."

A collision course (ctd) (See note 17, under # 8. aND P. 59, as to the kind of "problems" Aquinas had to consider as a result of attemtping to fit faith kwithin the Aristotleian frameworkd).)

Indeed, with the two sources of knowledge fully explicitly acknowledged, reason could not be simply seen anymore as the ancilla theologiae , since it possessed its proper realm in a large part of which it was completely autonomous and could and should move according to its own lights. But the conflict between fkaith and reason, hidden by Aquinas's synthesis , is more profound than that, in that the classification of faith as a source of knowledge and the acknowledgement of another source of knowledge side by side with faith threatens the self-sufficiency of faith and theabsolute supremacy of revelation. Certainly Saint Paul saw an antithesis between the sapientia mundi and the Christian sapientia crucis for which one would have much trouble finding a place within Aquinas's synthesis. Thus, one would be wrong in thinking these theologians, of whom X might have been one, were simply reacting out of academic jealousy or of an instinct of self-defense concerning their discipline. The heat generated by the struggle between the traditionalists and the Aristotelians might suggest that such was the case. Here is a representative sample of the passionate exchanges that took place, among many others that could be quoted:

Quidam sunt qui tamquam bruta animalia

However, reducing the controversy to a tempest in the academic pot and attributing the rejection of the two surces of knowledge to sheer irrationalism and obscurantism, as Gilson among others does, fails to do justice to the stakes involved. Did Gilson even suspect that classifying faith as a source of knowledge amounts to distorting it and assimilating it to the Aristotelian epistemology? . St Bernard among others (see Gilson on the anti-rationaists-fideists. And, above, Marrou, St Augustin et la fin de la culture antique, p. 352. Notice that "fideism," as the term is usually understood and defined, already presupposes the Aristotelian notion of knowledge as merely intellectual and prejustified assent and of revelation as a source of that kind of knowledge ). For, far from being a merely academic matter, what was at stake (or at least appeared to those who rejected the notion of the two sources to be at stake), was of supreme importance. For the champions of faith, what was at stake was nothing less than the absolute supremacy and selbstandigkeit of the divinely revealed history of salvation as the ultimate frame of reference. For the champions of reason, by contrast, what was at stake was nothing less than the absolute supremacy and selbstandkigkeit of reason--of Aristotelian reason, that is--to determine the truth-reality value of any judgment-statement, those of divine revelation included, for otherwise the assent of faith would be blind and irrational. Whether these two all-embracing visions could be harmoniously combined, as Aquinas thought, or whether the very attempt to combine them as parallel sources of truth amounted to enthrone both of them in a collision course which, by the very Aristotelian terms of the confrotation was bound to terminate in the triumph of reason and the banishment of faith to the realm of the irrational is what we are exploring here .   

Until then all academic disciplines had indeed been at the service of "the sacred science." But, what is much more important, reason itself had been, at least in explicit theory, the servant of faith-- ancilla fidei --for the simple reason that the only and fixed frame of reference was the world defined by divine revelation, the history of salvation.

^(F8) Indeed, revelation had the shape of a temporal, historical development in which God was the main actant and within which one found one's place rather than of an all-embracing simultaneously given, intelligible picture.

That was the unshakeable framework in relation to which everything--including reason and the reasoning Christian--had its proper place. Otherwise said, in the Christian vision reason had had, until then, no proper domain of its own in which it could function in full autonomy from faith, since faith gave access to reality. Now, by contrast, not only did reason do have its own domain and contribute its own portion to the total picture of reality, but the portion of the picture divinely revealed, rather than defining the fundamental structure of the whole had to be placed within the map of reality as a coequal part of the whole .   As it turned out, Aquinas's synthesis worked only on paper. In actual life, it did not work . If the acceptance of the notion of the two sources of truth, so matter-of-factly adopted by Aquinas, was seldom, if at all, attacked from the right, that is, by the Catholic theologians as sacrificing the integrity and selbständigkeit of Christianity, once the synthesis became accepted, it was because, in words and in intention, though not in dkeed, it subordinated reason to faith in case of 'apparent' conflict betweem the two, while, in words again, it portrayed faith as, if not merely rational in its totality, at least as partly rational and in no portion positively irrational. Those on the left, however, those who had taken seriously the notion of reason as a source of truth, could not in the long run fail to impugn Aquinas's synthesis as failing to respect the integrity of reason, much as others--Luther and Barth among them would impugn it as failing to respect the integrity of faith . These people, unlike Aquinas , proclaimed the full autonomy of reason within its proper domain, that is, within the whole field of reality accessible to reason left to its own devices, including the portion of that field which was common to both reason and revelation, and ultimately within the whole field of reality, since reality was by definition coextensive with what was accessible to reason.

Of this attitude we find traces as early as ------------. The Pope--------, the Bishop of Paris--------- condemned the absolute Aristotelians. This state of war between what today we would identify, in terms of their respective professions, as "philosophers" (the representatives of reason left to its own devices) and "theologians" (the representatives of revelation and of its supremacy in matters common to both revelation and reason), came to a first full-blown crisis around 1266 (?) at the university of Paris. In that year Siger of Brabant, an "artist" who had taken seriously the God-willed autonomy of reason within its proper domain,  defended the so-called "theory of the two truths" in order to safeguard the autonommy of reason within its proper domain. According to him, within the field of knowledge covered by divine revelation but also accessible to reason left to its own devices, reason functioning according to its nature could reach conclusions that were at odds with what God had revealed. Hence the idea of the two truths--the truths revealed, and the truths of reason.

It is not quite clear whether Siger himself believed that it was possible for Christians to give their assent of faith and their rational assent to two pieces of knowledge that were at odds with each other. More likely, what he was defending was the methodological right of the Christian philosopher as philosopher to proceed within the proper realm of its discipline unencumbered by any presure or limitation from theologians, leaving it to theologians to determine whether the conclusions reached by the philosopher were or were not compatible with divine revelation. (See van Steenberghen) . At any rate, whatever Siger's personal position might have been, Rome intervened and formally condemned the theory of the two truths-----------------.

The point here is not to determine whether Rome or Siger was right, but to show that Aquinas's so-called synthesis of faith and reason, that is, his matter-of-factly acceptance of the notion of two sources of knowledge as well as his solution to the problems of coordination that result from it, is actually  fraught with problems  because it failed to safeguard the autonomy and ultimate sovereignity of reason. Aquinas himself would, of course, claim that he accorded reason its proper autonomy by commanding it not to assent to its own conclusions even on matters pertaining to its natural jurisdiction when its conclusions were at variance with divine revelation. But such autonomy could hardly satisfy those who, like Siger, firmly grounded on the very Thomistic idea that reason is a gift from God whose natural purpose is to reach knowledge , maintained that reason should be implicitly trusted and left to work according to its own natural laws, whatever the conclusions it reached.

Siger of Brabant lived, however, in an age of faith, in which the prerogatives of divine revelation tended to go uncontested. Thus he humbly abjured the idea of the two truths and bent his mind to assent to the truth of faith that, contrary to his own conclusions, the soul was immortal (?). One may therefore say that, for all practical purposes, Siger came around to Aquinas's view of the conduct to be followed by the Christian in case of apparent conflict between revelation and reason. In such a case, as we remember, reason--still the servant of faith in matters common to both revelation and reason-- was supposed to deny assent to its own conclusions, look actively for the detection of its own mistake, and at any rate wait for the time at which the right conclusion, which would infallibly coincide with the truth revealed, would be rationally reached.

Siger, however, as I just said, still lived, no less than Aquinas, in what we might identify as an age of faith,  However, once reason had been openly recognized as a source of knowledge, Pandora's box had been opened. Things were bound to change in time, and to change in favor of reason rather than of revelation , for the very reason reflected in Aquinas's views on the two sources: that reason is a source of knowledge is far more obvious than that revelation is. What Frei portrays in his famous book is nothing else than a moment in the slow but irreversible process by which reason, in the field of biblical studies, not only moved toward the full autonomy from revelation which it reclaimed, but ultimately enthroned itself and excluded revelation as a source of genuine knowledge because of the latter's  unavoidable reliance on authority rather than on evidence . Kant's effort to make room for faith and to find a place for religion within the limits of reason represents the inverse--and equally unsuccessful--synthesis of faith and reason from Aquinas's.

It seems, then, that Aquinas's once so praised solution to the problems of coordination (a solution to which, for lack of an alternative, some Catholics and a number of Catholic theologians still clung to), far from constituting a genuine synthesis of faith and reason, carried within itself the seeds of its own failure and was only a half-house (and an eminently precarious one, at that) between faith and secularism . In other words, with the acknowledgement of reason as a source of knowledge parallel to faith Aquinas placed faith and reason on a collision course from which faith could not but be eliminated as a source of knowledge. This is the evolution that culminated at the time of the Enlightenment in Kant's futile vindication of faith--if vindication is indeed the right word--as a practically necessary but nonetheless rationally unjustifiable, that is, blind, postulate . And the failure of the synthesis has led many people, and continues to lead more and more people involved in the intellectual life, to the enthronment of reason and the suppression of revelation, leaving blind fideism as the only refuge to those who stubbornly refuse to lose their faith .

(6) Backtracking to Aristotelianism

I said above that the epistemological break involved the introduction of a new conception of reason and of rationality.

To be more pointed, it involved the introduction, for the first time, of an explicit, normative view of reason and rationality, grounded on an explicit and apparently persuasive view of of knowledge. In short, it involved an explicit, normative epistemology that determined what could and could not be legitimately considered as real . I want now to explore this aspect of the revolution.

Before the rediscovery of Aristotle's works, what God had revealed (as recorded in the Bible) constituted the axis of reality, in relation to which everything else that existed had its proper place and had to be placed * ^(F9). Thus, the fundamental access to reality was through divine authority * ^(F10). For Aris, by contrast, real was coextensive with rationally knowable. It was, actually, the correlate of the knowing capacity of reason, that is, of the intellect in its judging capacity . This is to say that, according to Aristotle, only that was genuinely knowable and, therefore, real, which could be discovered by human reason left to its own devices and proceeding according to its own nature, that is, on the basis of its grasp of sufficient reason for affirming or denying. As THE AUGUSTINIAN GERMAN MAKES IT CLEAR, FOR ARIS AND PLATO KNOWLEDGE THROUGH AUTHORITY, KNOWLEDGE OF FAITH, WOULD HAVE BEEN A CONTRADICTION IN TERMS.

^(F11)  The Praeambula fidei as accessible to reason left to itself show that Aquinas was a foundationalist. Fideism would have left our belief foundationless, blind. This, in its turn, shows that faith, for Aquinas, was belief that .

Needless to say, since in the Aristotelian epistemology the real is coextensive with the knowable, and the knowable coextensive with what can be be judged to be the case by reason left to its own devices, no revealed knowledge was conceivable, since by definition revealed knowledge is to be assented to on the basis of God's authority.

*1 [ The Bi *1 [ Through their Christian cultural upbringing, the Bible constituted people's access to reality, to the world in which they lived. They did not see the biblical text as I see the glasses when they are on my desk. Rather, they wore

the biblical text, so to say, as I wear my glasses. Because I am an exposed agent, not an invulnerable contemplator , my glasses open me practically to objects for response, as shown by the initial incapacity to act and the later correction when wearing inverting glasses. ( A better image than the glasses is  my body, for I do not wear my body, I am my body. This cultural-Christian body which I am is habitually situated within the biblical history toward the future, much as I am situated here-now whenever I read a map to go somewhere, not when I see a map as a picture). The distinction is similar to that between knowledge objectified in statements (to be brought to evidence) and applied knowledge in which what is stated is object for response to be transcended in a desired state of affairs, and what is stated is itself the abstracted result of application ].

*2 [ Fideism authority, and evidence: One has to be careful about divine authority. For authority, in the Aristotelian vein in which Aquinas understands and means this term, is the opposite of evidence (that is why creditum non potest esse scitum: nothing can be object of authoritative faith and of evidential knowledge at the same time) , and both refer to statements exclusively, for only statements are true or false . Now, statements are object of assent. They convey a supposedly true picture of reality--knowledge of reality. That is, they give access to reality as known , as known fact; in fact reality is defined as that to which the mind can be conformed, ["Convenientiam vero entis ad intellectum exprimit hoc nomen verum. Omnis autem cognitio perficitur per assimilationem cognoscentis ad rem cognitam, ita quod assimilatio dicta est causa cognitionis: sicut visus per hoc quod disponitur per speciem coloris, cognoscit colorem. Prima ergo comparatio entis ad intellectum est ut ens intellectui correspondeat: quae quidem correspondentia, adquatio rei et intellectus dicitur" ( De Veritate , q. 1, a. 1, resp.],. that is, as what is knowable, at least knowable by God. However, before reason and revelation became the counterparts of each other and mutually limiting with the adoption of Aristotelianism, God's authority did not primarily refer to statements of object contemplated, at least not primarily and exclusively, nor to reality as known rather than as encountered in exposure. One did not enter reality through a picture, prejustified or not. One, so to say, found oneself within the sphere of reality, and one found oneself within it existentially, that is, as an exposed agent-patient . Now, this sphere of reality was dramatic and structured around God as the main "actant" . Which is to say that one did not enter reality through knowledge of reality in either of its versions: not through stating "authority" as opposed to "vision," anymore than through vision as opposed to authority . Authority in this sense, as well as justified knowledge as distinguished from authoritative faith rather than as practical appropriate response, came later as the product of the reflective, objective comparison between the content of the judgment of faith and the content of the judgment of knowledge. In the pre-Thomistic moment knowledge was not yet paired with faith as mutually limiting notions nor was faith conceived as authoritative rather than evidential-justified knowledge. [See de Broglie, Pour une théorie rationnelle de l'acte de foi, 2e ptie, pp. 8-17. He explains very well that Aquinas is not a rationalist (theologie post-cartesienne) in the skjense of "Je tiens cela pour vrai parce qu'atteste par Dieu, et je tiens cela pour atteste par Dieu parce que le fait de cette assertion est evident a ma raison (p. 11). For Aquinas,, the act that God atteksts is as much object of faith as what God attests. So, in this sense, Aquinas is a fid eist. Hkowever, even with this welcome correction to the post-cartesian misunderstanding of Aquinas's, Aquinas as understood by de Broglie is wrongheaded. For Aquinas-de Broglie understands what God says at what God states--that is, truths that correspond to God's own vision. In other words, Gods authority is the authority of a non-demonstrating teacher, as if the only or at least the most fundamental speech act were stating. In fact God did not reveal to Abraham by way of statements but by way of such commands and promises that showed his absolute lordship, that is, his absolute authority as The Lord. For Aquinas it is a matter of guiding ourselves already in this life not by our evidences but by God's evidences (p. 15); this is why, in case of apparent contradiction between reason and faith, kwe dkeny what appears evident to reason.   

For Aris, then, reason, that is, human intelligence in its judging capacity , was the exclusive judge-knower of reality, to whose dictamen every claim to knowledge was subject. This is to say that in matters of knowledge reason was supreme or sovereign and could not conceivably share that supremacy.   

To fully understand Aristotle's epistemology--or, at any rate, the particular version of Aristotle's epistemology that Aquinas appropriated and bequeathed to the Western world--it is esential to keep in mind that Aristotle was Plato's disciple and that, for all his originality, he remained under the latter's influence in significant regards. Now, one of the points in which Plato's influence on Aristotle's remained operative concerns the latter's idea of episteme or rigorous, scientific, knowledge by contrast to doxa, that is, belief.

^(F12) This Platonic heredity complicated endlessly Aristotle's notion of knowledge: the knowledge of the universal but not essential, the knowledge of the particular, knowledge of the intelligible but not of the sensible, non-scientific knowledge as knowledge, motivating knowledge as knowledge.  

This may be coordinated with Plato's contrast between "phainomena" and the cognitive states concerned with them, on the one hand, and, on the other, truth and genuine understanding. For a few instances, see Rep 467A, 598B, 602D; 'phainomena' is significantly replaced by 'nomima', conventional beliefs . (SEE NUSSBAUM, "Saving Aristotles's Appearances," p. 270, note 7). The importance of understanding this aspect of the Aristotelian epistemology may be surmised from the fact that in Aquinas's Summa Theologica revelation-faith and reason-evidential knowledge through grasp of compelling reason for affirming or denying appear related to each other as sources of knowledge-of-reality precisely in connection with the issue of the scientific character of theology.

Plato opposes belief to knowledge , that is, doxa to episteme (and appearance- phainomenon  to reality), as illusion of knowledge to genuine knowledge . For him, only what is intelligible (by opposition to sensible, to sensible appearance, to phainomenon) as well as absolutely necessary and unchangeable (by opposition to what is contingent (temporal) or accidental, and therefore changeable) can be object of genuine knowledge, that is, epistaton (byu oppposition to doxaston ), for only a reality of that kind can render necessarily true the knowing act by which it is grasped: at any time and no matter what the circumstances, the knowing act will be true. This is to say that, for Plato, only that understanding which is necessarily true qualifies as knowledge. Such is, precisely and exclusively, the status of episteme, whose only corresponding object are the intelligible, eternal Ideas. The rest is mere illusion, doxa , the very antithesis of genuine knowledge, for doxa presents itself under the guise of knowledge without satisfying the necessary conditions for knowledge. Such is the case of sensible perception, in particular. Indeed, the reason why, for Plato, knowledge is a deed of the intellect, not of the senses, is that what the senses perceive is transient and contingent rather than eternal and necessary. The sensible, therefore, is just object of belief, " doxaston ," not object of genuine knowledge, " epistaton ." (Notice that Plato does not distinguish between scientific and non-scientific knowledge, be it speculative or practical, as Aristotle will at least implicitly do).

Now, though Aristotle's modifies Plato's epistemology to such an extent that the result is a genuinely different, new, non-idealistic epistemology, there is nonetheless an undeniable kinship between Aristotle's epistemology and Plato's which shows that the former is a direct descendant from the latter . As is well known, Aristotle brings the Platonic Ideas from their separate realm to the world as what is intelligible--that is, universal and necessary--in the sensible. For him, like for Plato, only the intelligible can be object of episteme strictly understood, that is, of universal and necessary knowledge. Unlike Plato, however, Aristotle does not make of doxa the antithesis of knowledge, a mere illusion . Doxaston or object of doxa is, for him, like for Plato, what is not eternal and necessary and cannot therefore be object of episteme or necessarily true knowledge. Yet, more pragmatic than Plato, Aristotle does not see the senses as irremediably fallacious but rather as sources of knowledge, nor does he think that the real is universal but particular. However, the sensible realities being particular rather than universal, and changeable and contingent rather than eternal and necessary, they cannot be object of necessarily true knowledge, but only of " doxa ," that is, of contingently true knowledge, of merely factical knowledge, that is--and on this he differs from Plato--of a judgment that is true without being necessarily true . Now, since the judgment in which the knowledge of the sensible consists is not necessarily true, it can conceivably be false even when it happens to be true. Thus, whereas for Plato what is object of belief--the doxaston by contrast to the epistaton --is always merely apparent, not real, for Aristotle it is sometimes real, when it corresponds to a contingently true judgment, and sometimes false, when it corresponds to a false judgment.

But how can we know for sure when the judgment by which we affirm a particular, contingent, sensible reality is true? The answer is that we can never know with unshakeable certainty, precisely because what is particular and contingent cannot be object of necessarily true knowledge. Now, that lack of certainty inherent to the knowledge of the sensible is what had prompted Plato to exclude the sensible as object of genuine knowledge or episteme and to reduce the object of knowledge to the epistaton . In Aristotle's case, by contrast, the result of his admission of the sensible as object of knowledge is a troublesome ambiguity. Indeed, neither is he willing, on the one hand, to rejoin Plato in considering all sensible objects as merely apparent rather than real and, correlatively, in seeing the understanding in which doxa consists as yielding mere illusion rather than knowledge, nor, on the other hand, can he justify his commonsensical conviction that sensible objects are real rather than merely apparent and, correlatively, that opinion concerning sensible objects is genuine--though not scientific or necessarily true--knowledge rather than illusion .

^(F13) Perhaps this is why he admits the " endoxon ," the "what appears to us," the belief that is grounded only on what "we" think to be the case. Cf Nussbaum on saving the phenomena, that is, the endoxa , the best appearances (Infra).

Now, this fundamental ambiguity in the status of the sensible is particularly troublesome in Aristotle's case. After all, in Plato's epistemology the sensible has no importance by itself, it is an illusion. Indeed, in his epistemology there is a complete divorce between knowledge and belief, between understanding and sensing, between the intelligible and the sensible. Aristotle, however, explicitly makes of the sensible the ultimate origin of all knowledge, even of scientific knowledge , both because without sensible impressions there would be nothing to understand (what the Scholastics interpreted as nihil est in intellectu quod prius non fuerit in senu ), and because Aristotle's epistaton is not Plato's separated Ideas but what is intelligible in or through the sensible. Hence, if the sensible cannot be known with certainty and may therefore not be real, then the knowledge of the intelligible in or through or on the basis of the sensible, which constitutes Aristotle's alternative to Plato's hopeless theory of the Ideas, as well as the possibility of scientific knowledge as necessarily true, are in jeopardy. [SEE MANSION: FACTUAL JUDGMENT IN ARIS. AND SEE FOLLOWING SECTION].

(7) Ambiguities in Aristotle's notion(s) of knowledge (cf. last section).

SPECULATIVE AND PRACTICAL KNOWLEDGE IN ARISTOTLE

As if such troublesome ambiguity in Aristotle's epistemology were not enough, in  addition it is fraught with  difficulties of a different kind that originate in the distinction he makes between speculative and practical knowledge . In the NE he explicitly denies that the practical knowledge involved in ethics --practical because it is meant to result in (ethically appropriate) action rather than in contemplative assent-knowledge--is rigorous or scientific, that is, universal and necessary. At least one of his arguments for this is that ethical knowledge cannot be scientific because it is knowledge of the particular (and contingent?) rather than of the universal and necessary, and being particular (and contingent) are precisely the characteristics of the doxaston , of what is object of opinion. This seems to suggest that ethical knowledge is a particular example of factical knowledge. But the case is not so. For factical knowledge can be speculative, object of mere assent . Furthermore, certain facts are regular, repeated, have a "form," whereas that is not the case with ethical or deliberative actions .

The picture is still complicated by another factor, namely, the motivating character of ethical (deliberative) and non-ethical, animal-but-motivating practical knowledge by contrast to the non-motivating character of speculative knowledge and of factical knowledge .

^(F14) "Animal-but-motivating-practical-knowledge."

It seems that the two notions of knowledge Aristotle has originate in his Platonic intellectualism , on the one hand, an in his realistic biologism (cf. DMA and first chapter of Metaphysics ), on the other. However, he confuses the two, for he seems to attribute "knowledge quod" to animals, though not "knowledge quia," because animals possess no intellect. In fact, however, animals have no knowledge-quod of the kind Arist takes for such, for they are non -linguistic and, therefore, incapable of objectifying. Their supposed knowledge-quod is mere practical disposition to perceive-applicatively object for response in a pre-programmed way, be the program innate or acquired through successful past action (Humean practical, non-verbal, merely applicative "expectations"). In other words, animals have no linguistic 'picture,' either practical or speculative. They make no predications. For a dog the name of its master evokes, by association, the presence of its master, and it activates the disposition to encounter his master; the dog cannot conceptualize its master as subject of predication and ask "What about my master?" Were they able to do that, they would be able to transmit verbally their knowledge, their practical picture of particulars or repetitive universals: "Your house is burning," "Fire burns."

Knowledge in animals is neither the program by itself nor the object of response by itself, but the object's capacity, thanks to the program, to activate the program and elicit the programmed response, according to the naturally programmed goals. People, by contrast, make decisions, within limits, for within limits they choose their goals.

Plato does not realize that our predicative 'pictures' are not pictures but applicative programs . Taking them for pictures, he investigates their truth, their correspondence. In fact, that was the original philosophical undertaking: to substitute custom and authority for knowledge. And that is what philosophy has remained ever since, and why it leads to skepticism or textualism à la Derrida.

As for Aristotle, it seems to me that he is of two minds, and without noticing it . He never became quite independent from Plato. O on the one hand, then, as Plato's disciple , though he gives up the eternal Ideas, he keeps Plato's intellectualism and at least to an extent the ideal of scientific knowledge (as universal opposed to sensible particular, and as necessarily true opposed to temporal and contingent), though he relaxes Plato's strictures and admits the doxaston as legitimate (though not fully grounded) knowledge. On the other hand, on his own and as a realistic biologist , Aris introduces a totally different notion of knowledge-- motivating knowledge --but without realizing that it is incompatible or at least incommensurable with the Platonic one. Indeed, he maintains speculative judgment as the genuinely cognitional act as well as the notion of truth as correspondence. That is why he compares ethical knowledge to speculative knowledge and finds it not exact or not rigorous. And he seems to keep the notion of judgment, which is guaranteed knowledge and corresponds to the Platonic influence, even in the sphere of the practical. He does not realize that there is no knowledge-quod (as he understands it) even in the practical knowledge of people , because the predication is not a picture that mirrors reality but practical, applicative predication which reaches its epistemic fruitition only in actual application.

Let us be precise as to where practical knowledge belongs in Aris's view .  

For Plato whatever is not episteme or scientific knowledge is not knowledge at all, is mere doxa, totally arbitrary opinion, mere illusion. Total opposition, then, between knowledge and doxa. Only the Ideas, eternally and immutable, can be epistaton (object of episteme ); all the rest, that is, whatever is not eternal and immutable, is doxaston (object of doxa ), illusion.

Moreover, as far as practical knowledge is concerned, action is an algorithmic techne , a practical episteme , that follows necessarily the epistemic knowledge of what is good.

Aristotle's case is more complicated, though perhaps not quite coherent:

(1) Episteme : (a) Knowledge quia (strictly necessary and universal, that is, exceptionless). This knowledge is opposed to doxa (opinion, not illusion) as knowledge quod , purely factical knowledge, but genuine knowledge nonetheless (contrary to Plato).

NB. I am not sure whether this kind of doxa is opposed by Aristotle to doxa-illusion, that is, doxa as totally arbitrary opinion. Plato, of course, would not accept this distinction; for him, whatever is not universal and necessary knowledge is not knowledge. In other words, I am not sure whether Aris uses the word "doxa" in two senses, that is, in Plato's sense and in a different one that nonetheless does not coincide with episteme .

   (b) Knowledge quia insofar as it is "exact" or "rigorous," that is, as it fits exactly (that is, by virtue of explanatory definition) all the particular cases. If one understands the quia one thereby understands fully all the particular cases.

  PERHAPS this is opposed by Aris to knowledge quod of objects or phenomena that are repetitive and regular. For instance, eclipses, or illnessess like small'pox which have regular symptoms, as well as their regular remedies when it is not known why the remedies work. Such knowledge, purely pragmatic knowledge of the regularity but not of the rule as the exact reason for the regularity , is non-rigorous by comparison to knowledge quia , but it is not inexact or approximative.

Pure 'factical' knowledge, that is, knowledge of singular, non-repetitive fact, for instance the knowledge of a historical fact would, according to this classification, be the most opposite to rigorous or scientific knowledge, to episteme . Yet it would still be knowledge, though doxastic, not scientific, for Aris is not an idealist, nor does he think that the senses are systematically misleading.

MOST CERTAINLY , scientific knowledge in the sense of exact or rigorous by opposition to approximative is opposed by Aris in NE to ethical knowledge , that is, to the deliberative knowledge involved in the agent's choice of his or her action as the appropriate one under the circumstances. In what sense is the latter knowledge inexact? - To begin with, Aris is directly referring to the knowledge constituted by the ethical discipline he himself is practicing (writing), where he gives genral rules which are abstracted from the practice of "our prudents." He means that the ethical discipline can lead to inexact rules that give guidance, but not to exact rules for action.

[As explained by Nussbaum in chapter 10 of The Fragility of Goodness  ("Non-scientific deliberation") these rules or principles function as "rules of thumb," not as algorithms for action. She compares them to laws, which take into account the general case but not every circumstance. So, she concludes, ethics can be taught partly by a reflection of the Aristotelian kind by an experienced adult, partly by practical education that develops the right habits. The reflection, as instantiated by Aris's NE, leads to the general ethical principles or rules as grounded in the conception of the genuinely ethical agent implicit in the choices of "our" prudents, that is, of the agents admired in our culture for their ethically appropriate choices . Needless to say-- pace Nussbaum, who thinks that Aris's ethics, though anthropomorphic rather than from Plato's god's objective-strictly universal point of view is nonetheless valid for all humans--the prudents of another culture would act differently, and their choices would imply a different conception of the genuinely ethical agent. As an example, the Christian culture involves among the virtues the theological virtues of faith, hope, and charity, and such cardinal virtues as humility, which not only are not included in Aris's lists of virtues but would be positively rejected by him and by Nussbaum. This, I think, shows that Aris's and Nussbaum's conception of the ethical agent, as any other, is not merely anthropocentric but parochial --and irremediably so--literally extracted from the practice of our prudents, and therefore inadmissible by the members of another culture. Our Christian practice concerning suicide and divorce are cases in point. It follows that Aris's reflection on the nature of the ethical, that is, of the ethically prudent agent is useful only for the members of his culture in order to foster among them the ethical practices of his culture and to confirm them in their previous habituation.

Another point. It is questionable, in my opinion, that the agent who has to face the future by way of deliberation and choice needs in order to act, or ever uses in his or her deliberations, such a high-faluting thing as Aris' ethical theory. Indeed, from such a high-level theory, no concrete rules for action can be deduced, not even inexact ones, for instance, against or for suicide. It seems rather that Aris' is a theory of   our prudent agent abstracted from the experience of the virtues possessed by our prudents.

BUT THE POINT THAT INTERESTS ME CONCERNS THE REASON WHY IN ETHICS THE RULES OR PRINCIPLES ARE NECESSARILY INEXACT, CANNOT BE EXACT.

One candidate for an answer is that it is a matter of practical reason in general. But this won't do. As indicated by Nussbaum, certain technai are exact. In other words, there are algoritmic solutions for certain practical problems. For instance, for getting equivalent surfaces of land when the Nile recesses (geometry). Or, on a more pragmatic level, robotic automation for producing cars. [Notice that part of the reason  why the actual application is unproblematic is that the end is taken for granted, there is no deliberation about it]. Thus the reason cannot simply be that practical reason is by its very nature inexact. Ethical reason, so to say, may be; but not practical reason. There is practical knowledge that is exact, algorithmic.

Another candidate for an answer . Aris keeps suggesting that the reason is that the object in the case of ethics, namely, action, is particular. In other words, he does not say that the reason for the inexactness of the knowledge is that it is desirous knowledge, but that it is knowledge of particular. I find this unconvincing. Pace Aristotle, according to his very strictures, a particular may not be object of knowledge quia , but is object of knowledge quod , which is not inexact but exact and certain within the limits within which the non-Platonic, pragmatic Aristotle accepted.

The genuinely promising candidate . The reason for the inexactness of the knowledge is not that ethical knowledge is particular, but that it is not factical but desirous,  for it is applicative knowledge by particular desirous, exposed agent of particular object of exposure. This involves deliberation, that is, choice of ends , not only of means. The end to be chosen is not specified by the rule. What is the actually desirable thing under the circumstances, the desiderandum ? The British captain chose to abandon the boat rather than fighting the fire, on the basis of his grasp of the conflagration. I could choose not to throw myself to the water to save somebody on the basis of my appraisal of my strenght. An end is not an end when it is contemplated and talked about as an end, but when it is actually chosen and pursued as an end. Now, speculative knowledge is disinterested, objective, and non-applicative. It appeals exclusively to the intellect and leads to contemplative assent, not to action.

A further complication arises from the Aristotelian confusion in the Metaphysics between, on the one hand, the knowledge pursued in the methaphysical discipline or First Philosophy, which is speculative knowledge, that is, knowledge for its own sake without any possible usefulness and appeal to the subject , and, on the other hand, what might be called the coping, desirous knowledge involved in the action of animals and people . It seems that what is involved here is a confusion between knowing as a quality (program or self-program?) in an exposed subject who is thereby disposed to interpret things in a certain way, either theoretically or practically , and knowledge as objectified in statements-pictures supported by demonstrative or probabilistic discourse , statements which are taken to be pictures to be assented to as resemblant. (Think of the practical syllogism). This relates to Sartre's knowledge of the eye seeing, of the eye in its exposed subject's active capacity, and knowledge of the eye seen, of the eye in its object's passive capacity (which can be correlated to faith as practical knowledge in its agent's  subject's capacity, with which Aquinas does not deal, and faith in its patient's object's-of action  with which Aquinas does not deal either, and faith in its object's-of-speculative-knowledge passive capacity which Aquinas intends to "unite" (to use Sartre's expression) to the picture of the world in its passive, object's of speculative knowledge capacity, and to the picture of the body as seen, not of the body seeing .   

(8) The Aristotelian knower as a judging intellect

So far, following Aquinas's own order, we have been considering mostly the objects known through reason and through faith respectively. We now turn to the knower.  

Knowledge, therefore, is not a deed of the senses but of the intellect; not, however, of the intellect in its direct function of simple intellectual apprehension or understanding, but in its reflective function of judging. The reason for this is that only in judging, that is, in reflecting on its own apprehension and in finding sufficient reason for affirming or denying that what it has apprehended or understood is actually the case, can the intellect know that it genuinely knows. Without such a grasp there can be no knowledge in the full sense, for one would not know whether or not one really knows, whether what one apprehends is actually the case. Now, that in judging the intellect knows that it knows is manifested in the fact that in judging the intellect commits itself by affirming or denying unconditionally that something is the case, that is, guarantees explicitly to itself the truth of what it judges, the conformity between what it judges to be the case and reality. And the judging intellect can guarantee the conformity in  which truth consists because, unlike sensible and even intellectual apprehension, judging is a reflective activity through which the evidence of the conformity of what is apprehended and what is the case is revealed in the very grasp of sufficient reason for affirming or denying unconditionally and prompts the affirmation or negation.

What we just said makes understandable a very distinctive feature of the Aristotelian epistemology inherited by the medievals, namely, the view that truth is a property of judgments exclusively, that is, that truth and falsity can be found in no other cognitive acts than judgments, for only judgments involve knowing that one knows and explicit commitment to the truth of it. Of course, since verbal statements constitute the linguistic acts in which judgments are expressed and communicated to others, truth and falsity are also, albeit derivatively, found in statements, but cannot be found in any other linguistic acts, for only statements involve the affirmation or denial that something is the case.

^(F15) Hence, only in "philosophical" or "scientific", that is, demonstrative papers or works like the Summae that appeal exclusively to the judging intellect is truth to be found. Not in narratives, for, like the poet, a narrative "affirmeth nothing." (Yet, a narrative--for instance, some portions of the Bible, functionally comparable to "The Martians have landed"--are taken as true, that is, as referring to something real, historical. After all, existence is not a predicate).

This was the Aristotelian conception of knowledge (from the point of view of the knowing subject rather than of the objects known, the epistaton rather than the doxaston) that Aquinas appropriated and which became the interpretive framework for his understanding of divine revelation as statement of doctrine (predication) and of faith as intellectual assent . [SEE ABOVE, FIRST PAGES OF "BACKTRACKING TO ARISTOTELIANSM]. Indeed, given his accceptance of this epistemological theory, he was logically constrained to see faith as an intellectual act of assent, that is, as a judgment--a special kind of judgment whose sufficient reason is not the evidence of what is assented to but the divine authority that supports it, instead of seeing it as the forward looking (but not contentless) practical disposition to respond as indicated by the practical, desirous content . Like "There is somebody downstairs."

^(F16) As far as divine revelation is concerned, the case is clear. From the very first article of the Summa Theologica what is revealed by God is identified as "a doctrine" and is compared to "the philosophical disciplines investigated by human reason." What the philosophical disciplines investigated by human reason lead to is, of course, knowledge, and what God reveals is knowledge, too, namely, the " truths " (stated) which are conducive to man's salvation. That what is revealed is a certain kind of knowledge is confirmed by Aquinas's correlative analysis of faith, where what is divinely revealed is identified as object of assent, not of response. (This is why there is such a thing as mortua fides which is nevertheless fides , and why theologians can be good theologians without living according to the faith convictions . Extreme case of " Sanctus oret, prudens regat ," except that the prudens here is not prudens at all, since Aquinas's theologian deals in truths to be assented to, not in dispositions to respond to such an object for response, depending of course on the circumstances of the actual encounter). Indeed, faith is defined by Aquinas as an intellectual act of assent to what is revealed by God, and only doctrines--what is stated--can be assented to. Furthermore, what is divinely revealed is declared by Aquinas to be infallibly true. This is why Aquinas sees faith--that is, the judgment by which on the basis of God's authority one assents to, and consequently, appropriates intellectually, what God reveals--as superior in certainty (though not in evidence) to the knowledge naturally acquired by human reason. Furthermore, as we already know, Aquinas sees what God' reveals as a complement to the knowledge acquired through the natural or unassisted activity of reason, which could not be the case if what is revealed were not a kind of knowledge. Only because faith is knowledge and revelation a doctrine, can Aquinas compare the knowledge of faith to the knowledge of reason and say that the knowledge in which faith consists is of a special kind--superior to purely rational knowledge in terms of certainty, for it rests on God's infallibility, and at the same time inferior to purely rational knowledge in terms of evidence, for the assent of the judgment in which faith consists is motivated by God's authority, not by the evidence of that to which assent is given.     

Most definitely, therefore, Aquinas is interpreting divine revelation and faith according to the categories of his Aristotelian epistemology, an epistemology which he received ready-made . However, since Aristotle had no notion whatsoever of divine revelation, his epistemology rested on the assumption that reason left to its own natural devices is the only source of genuine knowledge. Consequently, he made reality, by definition, coextensive with what could be known by reason left to its own devices and functioning according to its own nature.

^(F17) This is to say that Aristotle's epistemology  [his Platonic epistemology, that is, not his epistemology as a realistic biologist] amounted to a particular species of rationalism, that is, of the view that only what is  within the reach of judging reason left to to its own devices and acceptable to reason by virtue of reason's nature can be real . (Much as for Kant only what can be object of sensible intuition is knowable). Needless to say, such an epistemology was ill-fitted to accommodate another source of knowledge side by side with reason, much less another source of knowledge to which reason could in any way be subordinated. In other words, if the Thomistic synthesis was open to attack from those who did not think that it safeguarded the selbstandigkeit and self-sufficiency and sovereignity of divine revelation and of faith, it was equally open to attack from those who did not hink that it safeguarded the selbstandigkeit and self-sufficiency and sovereignity of reason . To Aristotle  the project of marrying (his) reason with faith would have been as incongruous and absurd as the project of finding room for (his own) reason within faith would have been to Kant  [ PLACE THIS WITHIN "COLLISION COURSE" ].

Thus the fact that Aquinas--I mean Aquinas the philosophical thinker, not the Christian--attempted to fit faith within the framework of the Aristotelian epistemology (rather than judging the Aristotelian epistemology from the standpoint of its coherence with faith as he lived it) is far from trivial. To use Kantian language, Aquinas's undertaking consisted not in attempting to find room for Aristotelian reason within faith but, rather, persuaded of the validity of the understanding of reason he had inherited from Aristotle, he attempted to make room for revelation and faith within the framework of Aristotelian reason, which is the framework of reality-object-seen, not of reality interacted with in exposure .

Needless to say, as it could be argued to support Frei's notion of the eclipse, a gigantic shift was bound take place once this framework of interpretation was adopted . Where previously what God had revealed--that is, the concrete history of salvation in relation to which everything had to find its proper place constituted the core of reality, and all other realities had to be dramatic rather than factical to find their place within such dramatico-temporal structure, now a static 'Aristotelian' (?) notion of reality, that is, what is potential object of intellectual assent--be it divinely revealed or known by reason left to its own devices, has become the axis, and the history of salvation has to find its place within such non-dramatic, factical structure, which of course cannot be done without crushing the dramatic structure of biblical reality to reduce it to "doctrine," as Aquinas does.

Why should Aquinas have gone this way and adopted the Aristotelian epistemology as normative is not difficult to understand. As everybody else, Aquinas was introduced to the intellectual life by his Aristotelian teachers . Now, as phenomenologists engender phenomenologists and linguistic analysts engender linguistic analysts, Aristotelians engender Aristotelians. Which is to say that Aristotelianism was Aquinas's native culture as an intellectual, much as a few years ago Neo-Thomism was the native intellectual culture of Catholic intellectuals educated in Catholic schools. This is to say that, as an intellectual, Aquinas was born colonized by Aristotelianism. Given his exceptionally early and very intensive initiation into and exposure to Aristotelianism by passionate Aristotelians of Saint Albert the Great's sort, FOR AQUINAS THE INTELLECTUAL, NOT THE CHRISTIAN FOR WHOM THE SELBSTANDIGKEIT OF FAITH REMAINED BEYOND DISPUTE, the Aristotelian epistemology constituted, so to say, his own access to reality, so that as an intellectual he had to place all reality--revealed reality included--within the framework of the Aristotelian epistemology, which appeared to him as normative, that is, as the interpretive framework of the genuine thinker. Since, on the other hand, Aquinas as a deeply committed Christian had no doubt that divine revelation was true, and infallibly so, he could feel absolutely confident that divine revelation would find its proper place within the framework of the Aristotelian epistemology which he accepted as normative, without the slightest suspicion--until perhaps two weeks before his death--that such epistemology was radically inhospitable to faith .

[REFER TO COLLISION COURSE] However, that the Aristotelian epistemology, which after all had been elaborated without any regard to revelation and faith, was ill-fitted to assimilate the faith-reality--or reality as conceived from within the Christin faith--shows in the kind of problems that emerge in the Summa. For those problems are created by the necessity of making the faith-realities fit the strictures of the Aristotelian epistemology, a necessity imposed by the fact that Aquinas takes that epistemology as normative. Among those problems I will mention a few . One, universal truths against particular, temporal events, given that biblical revelation is eminently historical and "ephapax." Two, the "vetula" who knows more than the theologian, although she does not know according to Aristotle. Three, the reduction of the field of faith, and consequently of the merit of faith, for the  learned. Fourth, the division between the learned--the superior theologians--and the simple stupid fideles. Fifth, Calvin's " frigida parisiensis opinio "--and Luther's "Aristotle, that buffoon who misled the Church"--that motivates nobody. INSTEAD, HOWEVER, OF ABANDONING THE FRAMEWORK, AQUINAS INSISTED IN FITTING CHRISTIAN REALITIES WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK AT ALL COSTS.

But the cost of preserving the framework may be high in terms of deformation of the faith-realities that have to find its place within it, a deformation which has affected very deeply our explicit self-understanding as Christians and, at least in certain cases, has created very tough problems for us, such as the alternative between fideism ("la fe del carbonero") and losing one's faith to rationalism in order to avoid the denial of onself as rational .

The cost of preserving the Aristotelian framework may have been no less high on the side of reason, that is, of a culture that continues to be sold to speculative, unexposed reason as foundational, particularly in matters of morality . The physicalist foundationalist of Searle--one can live in only one world, and that world has to be the world of physics--is a typical result of the adoption of the model of unexposed reason, particularly as shaped by Descartes, Locke, Hume, and Kant. "Academia," "Catholic Academia" in particular--were it not but for reasons of self-interest, though it is also due in part to the lack of a viable alternative that avoids skepticism--continues to be committed to Aristotelian reason as opposed to faith, that is, to speculative reason that concretely consists in speculative judgment, though in fact the failure of such reason leads to skepticism (Postmodernism draws the consequence!), since the non-foundational, practical alternative of 'the good sophists' was substituted for philosophy as the carrier of reason. [NOTICE, HOWEVER, THAT NOBODY IS A PRACTICAL SKEPTIC. Cf. Nussbaum on postmodernism and the study of the law].

Thus, our culture--at least through Academia (but in the Catholic Church even more deeply than in Academia in general, for historical reasons connected with the rationality of faith)-- continues to depend on the Aristotelianism of the medievals, particularly of Aquinas's, if not on the Aristotelianism of Aristotle's.

(9) The logic of discovery and the logic of the discovered

(See my Addendum to "\wp\chant\excor-2", pp. 70 ff, April 14, 94) I distinguish the medievals' Aristotelianism from Aristotle's own in order to accommodate Nussbaum's view, who maintains that the medievals, Aquinas being no exception, mistook the view of scientific knowledge of the Posterior Analytics for Aris' view of the process through which knowledge is acquired, when in fact Aris is speaking there of (the presentation of) already acquired knowledge . It is, in Nussbaum's view, a logica expositionis , not a logica inventionis .

^(F18) It is not a matter of mere presentation, as Nussbaum claims, but of transmission of knowledge through which knowledge is acquired by others. The one who exposes (the one who writes the  'scientific' paper) may or may not have reached knowledge in the order of exposition. But the ones who listen to the paper do, and do so due to the order of exposition that systematically leads to assent to the teacher's view by furnishing evidence or sufficient reason. The listeners do reach what they take for knowledge by finding that there is sufficient reason for assenting or dissenting to the thesis-knowledge of the expositor, and what the expositor does is to present what he/she knows as supported by sufficient reason, by 'evidence.' Whether or not in the case of practical knowledge the discoverer reaches knowledge by way of evidence for assenting-affirming remains open in the Analytics . Indeed, in the Analytics Aris is concerned with speculative knowledge exclusively, and he believes that such knowledge is reached by the discoverer by way of evidence of sufficient reason, for that is what his identification of knowledge with correct judgment amounts to.

According to Nussbaum, what Aris calls scientific knowledge is closer to what Plato calls doxa than to what Plato calls episteme . Episteme or scientific knowledge was possible for Plato because (and only as long as) he believed in the intuition of Ideas, but impossible for Aris who does not. What Aris calls scientific knowledge is less stringent in terms of universality and necessity, more empirically grounded, and therefore there are degrees of certainty in scientific knowledge. The implication is that the medievals took literally the idea of scientific knowledge as consisting of universal and necessarily true judgment-statements (some inuitively grasped by the intellect, some deductively reached), whereas Aris, who was not a foundationalist-intuitionist like Plato, did not mean it literally as Plato did (Excor-2, p. 70).

^(F19) It is my hunch that the Aristotelian conception of knolwledge in the Analytics , i.e. the conception of speculative knowledge by contrast to practical knowledge as expounded in the DMA and NE and implicitly at the beginning of the Metaphysics , is based on the analogy between knowledge and reading of a text and, correspondingly, between reality and a written text to be understood and assented to, namely a written assertive-demonstrative text asking for mere assent (for only statements aim at assent and can be assented to).

Lonergan's explanation of the Aristotelian-Thomist theory of knowledge (summarized in Excor-2, pp.78-83), which does not deal at all with practical knowledge, seems to confirm my point.  Speculative knowledge is motivated exclusively by the desire to know--where to know is equated with mere understanding with assent based on the grasp of sufficient reason--and is therefore underpinned and guided by a question of mere curiosity to be satisfied by an answer that prompts mere assent. This is what a written statement aims at exclusively, particularly a 'scientific' statement that focuses on uniformity and explains it, abstracting from concrete particulars. Knowing by a discoverer, as described by Aris, is being confronted with a text to be understood and assented to, not with a reality to which oneself or somebody is exposed and has to respond to. The simplex apprehensio represents a tentative, prospective reading which, if confirmed by the reflective act that looks for sufficient reason, terminates in the firm, committed, assentful reading represented by the judgment, say "Deus est"-- mere speculative knowledge .

This process of discovery, which at best applies to speculative and explanatory, not to applicative, knowledge, is replicated in the communication of the discovery by the teacher . (However, it is wrongly and misleadingly conceived to apply to the practical knowledge of the kind conveyed by such statements as "Your house is afire," which seems to be the case of certain narratives of the Bible as heard by the faithful. When so interpreted, the visual phenomenon of the house afire, as if it were the content of a speculative statement, is read or understood as if it were a written text. This is not, however, what is meant by the speaker, for what was actually discovered was discovered by a "circumspect" exposed agent: not the house as a visual phenomenon, but the house as horrenda in its present state, because becoming unsuitable for habitation. Now, this house afire could not be discovered by an angel, however sighted and intelligent, but only by a potential user of houses needed for shelter, capable of horror and fear. We do not speak like angels because we have needs and are exposed, vulnerable agents. If a house afire were a mere visual phenomenon to be objectively stated, we would have never tried to put fires off. By contrast, the Aristotelian teacher states the content of his/her judgment as a hypothesis, together with the sufficient reason for it, in the hope of prompting the disciple's contemplative assent, that is, the same reading-understanding. The difference, then, is that in the case of the discoverer the simplex apprehensio confirmed in the judgment is an uncharted discovery made possible by linguistic or instinctive needs (and a practical discovery by an exposed agent in my particular example), whereas in the case of the disciple the simplex apprehensio is received as already formed in the statement (which demands less intelligence and tends to prevent fresh hypothesizing), and is supposedly meant as object of assent rather than as object for response.

What speculative judgments judge and affirm or deny is the synthesis--(the concept, that is, moving from concept without predicate to new concept with predicate) --the reality as known, the conceived (reality) as understood and stated, as object of assent, not the reality as encountered in situation of exposure and to be responded to. Under the same words, by contrast, the practical judgment means the object as object of exposure . Here the synthesis (insofar as we may speak of synthesis, since there is no predicate, for predicates are theoretical) is practical synthesis or application by which the agent moves from exposed to object, through project (be it instinctive or deliberative), to appropriate response . Hence the existential judgment is always mediated not by the speculative intellect, but by the bodily, vulnerable agent .

Without apparently realizing the implication of his point, Lonergan puts very well his Aristotelian conviction: "Our knowledge of God's existence is just our knowledge of the truth of the judgment, 'Deus est'"--of the truth, that is, of the sufficient reason for affirming or denying. And that is indeed what Aquinas, and I think Aristotle too, would have to say, if they were fully consistent. THIS IS THE GOD OF PHILOSOPHERS. But the God we Chistians adore and speak to and about is not the referent of the contemplative content of a judgment, that is, not the content of a speculative judgment . And a practical judgment is not judgment in the same sense, since it is not a speculative intellectual act; a practical judgment is mediated by a vulnerable agent exposed to the object, not by sufficient reason for affirming .

^(F20) Careful! A practical judgment is not necessarily mediated by the exposed agent; only the practical existential judgment is.  The propositions of geometry are meant applicatively, but they refer to characteristics of the object (though object for response), not to the desirous agent, to the agent situated with distances ofexposure in relation to it. The fact remains, however, that there is an ominous equivocation lurking here concerning existential judgments, for existential judgments are not synthetic and, therefore, properly speaking, are not judgments. Existence, as Kant rightly maintains, is not a predicate and, therefore, not object of judgment -assent or of sensible intuition . There is indeed no difference between the real and the merely conceived 10 dlls bill for speculative judgment, which is the judgment Kant deals with in the First Critique, for existence ads nothing to the judgment.

The point, therefore, is not whether the Analytics deal with the way in which knowledge is reached or in which it is exposed or conveyed to others, but whether they deal with speculative or with practical knowledge. And in fact they deal with the speculative ' Nous ,' the one that achieves knowledge that does not move (to emotion and action), not at all with the practical knowledge with which the DMA and the NE deal . Its rhetoric (which is not literally a rhetoric since it aims at demonstration of purely intelligible and, ideally, absolutely certain, object rather than at moving persuasion to respond to concrete, emotive object of decision, that is, applicative knowledge without an algorithm that yields a techné ) is the 'rhetoric' of written scientific papers (and of Aquinas's Summa Theologica) which, if successful, terminate in "It is true that..." as object of mere assent.

^(F21) I suspect that in her interpretation of Aris' "saving the appearances" Nussbaum collapses the distinction between speculative and practical knowledge, between 'scientific" and 'existential' judgment mediated by exposed subject with distances of exposure, between 'moitivating' and 'non-motivating' knowledge. See her article on Owens, where she denies Owen's distinction between phainomena. This allows her to shortcircuit completely the medievals' interpretation of Aristotle.   

In conclusion, it becomes increasingly clear to me that Aris has indeed two different and mutually incompatible views of knowledge. Speculative and practical knowledge are not two species of the same genus, not even two genera. Rather, they constitute two different paradigms, two ways of chopping off the world. Needless to say, two different and incompatible conceptions of knowledge, two interpretive frameworks, cannot both be acceptable. In other words, Aris' intellectualistic conception of knowledge has to be explained away and dropped, and his views on practical knowledge need to be refined in order to distinguish between existential and non-existential judgments .

^(F22) Pace Aris, even what he calls speculative knowledge is not speculative, for it is not knowledge as a picture but as an applicative map, for it is knowledge potentially only insofar as it is capable of functioning applicatively. (Excor-2, pp 84-86. See what follows on p. 86 on Heidegger on Aris on onoma as semantikon aneu chronon , which does not 'give access' directly, much less applicatively and practically, but has to be seen-assented-understood itself, and which functions as a picture, by contrast to prosemainon chronon , where temporal distances which necessarily unfold from the present of exposure are existential and create a dramatic structure).

10) APPENDIX: ORTHODOXY AND ORTHOPRAXIS AS 'MOMENTS'

"On sait que pour Aristote et Saint Thomas la notion de la 'vérité' des 'jugements pratiques' et celle de la vérité des 'jugments spéculatifs' sont différentes: 'Verum intellectus speculativi accipitur per conformitatem intellectus ad rem; ... verum autem intellectus practici accipitur per conformitatem ad appetitum rectum' (Ia IIae, q. 57, a. 5, ad 3); et encore: 'Rectitudo appetitus per respectum ad finem est mensura veritatis in ratione practica' (in VI Eth. 1, 2). (De Broglie, Pour une théorie rationnelle de l'acte de foi , I, p. 185).

"Pour St Thomas..., la verité de l'intellect spéculatif a une valeur absolue ; elle est à aimer et à poursuivre pour elle-même . Aussi la prudence, qui a pour rôle propre de conduire notre activité pratique en fonction des mille contingences de la vie, a-t-elle pour unique rôle de nous montrer ce qui est bon a faire . Elle n'a aucunement a diriger notre spéculation comme telle , au moins s'il s'agit d'atteindre ce qui est absolument vrai . ' Intellectus speculativus... non dirigitur in judicando de veritate rerum secundum aliquam legem ab intellectu practico positam (I D. 49, 91, a. 1, q. 3, ad 4)... Soutenir une pareille doctrine [rejettée par de Broglie-Aquinas], c'est en fait attribuer une principauté absolue à la raison pratique sur la raison spéculative: celle-ci pouvant et devant être à l'occasion violentée et détournée de son objet propre (qui est la vérité), pour satisfaire aux exigences de celle là. Au fond, une telle doctrine porte en germe un pragmatisme et un relativisme universels! (Ibid., II, p. 108). (See also ibid., pp. 113-114).

Judgment is a reflective act. A speculative judgment is a reflective act on what is conceived and for affirming or denying which sufficient reason is discovered originally by the judging subject or furnished by somebody else and grasped as sufficient by the judging subject. Its truth lies in the conformity of what is judged with what is actually the case in reality. It could be said, somewhat paradoxically, that "believing that "  "with sufficient reason" = knowing, that is, genuine knowing, knowing the truth. This judgment is underpinned by the disinterested or objective desire to know what is the case in reality and, therefore, aims as its goal at this kind of truth or conformity by which such purely intellectual desire is to be satisfied.

Such is the Aristotelian-Thomist view on the speculative judgment. I am inclined to believe that this view is wrong.

It is my opinion that this view, according to which the judgment is a reflective act bearing on what is conceived as a hypothesis and leading to the categorical affirmation-statement of what is known on the basis of its sufficient reason, is based on  the wrong model. Indeed, the model here is not the involved agent who judges applicatively and states objects for response--which would be the right model--but the contemplator interested in truth-correspondence, in theoretical certainty (hence the emphasis on strict demonstration, on universal and necessary judgments), who either moves from not having evidence for a predicative proposition to having evidence and assenting to it, or moves another contemplator from not assenting to assenting to a predicative proposition by provinding evidence-sufficient reason for assenting to the proposition as true. (This is what philosophers do in conventions with their ideally demonstrative, purely objective papers. But agents are not in the business of guaranteeing contemplative statements, but in the business of acting appropriately).

A practical judgment is, de Broglie says ( see I, p. 185 ff ), a judgment of value, not of mere objective reality, such as "This coffee is better than that." This judgment does not judge what is the case objectively, but the convenience or conformity of an object to a certain appetite, the capacity of a certain object to satisfy a certain appetite (De Broglie, ibid., p 186). A good, discriminating drinker of coffee will be satisfied by this coffee more than by that. This is what critics of movies, theater, literature, wines, etc. do when they write. But do they know , rather than declaring arbitrarily, that this wine is better than that? Yes, they know because, supposedly, they have the right appetite. In other words, their practical judgments, which are judgments of value, are "true," that is, constitute genuine knowledge, only if, and only because, the critics have the right appetite, that is, the appetite that is satisfied by the particular object they declare good, appetibile .

^(F23) In the case of the critic, it is indeed a matter of declaring good (or bad). Notice, however, that the critic I have been referring to is the aesthetic critic, the one who is pleasurably affected by the degustation of a certain kind of object which he is capable of characterizing for others so that they can have an imaginary foretaste of the pleasure they will receive in the actual degustation of the object. Since the whole point in this case is the pleasurable degustation of a certain kind of object, authenticity--passing from the declaration to others to the declarer's action under the appropriate circumstances--will be spontaneous and easy, since by definition it will lead to actual pleasure. But what when it is not a matter of aesthetic degustation but of transitive action with ethical constraints?

De Broglie does not distinguish, at least not explicitly, the case of the critic from the case of the agent.  However, he analyzes in much detail the kind of practical judgments on the agent's part which are necessary for the free action. Three of those practical judgments or judgments of value, by contrast to judgments of existence, are necessary: (1) speculativo-practical universal, (b) speculativo-practical concrete and particular, and (3) practico-practical (see I, pp. 192-193). Are the first two varieties partly speculative because they judge in a declarative or stative mood that the object is good (or bad) rather than judging in the active mood that consists in tending effectively toward, or rejecting, the object felt as good? De Broglie writes: "nos jugements de valeur sont 'vrais' por autant que l'objet AFFIRMÉ [i.e, DECLARÉ] par nous comme bon correspond à l'objet vers lequel, indépendamment de notre jugement, se porte un certain désir auquel nous faisons (plus ou moins explicitement) allusion" (I, p. 187). The closest de Broglie comes to a genuine alternative to the division between intellectual-sighted and voluntary or affective-blind is in reference to the practico-practical judgment: "c'est le propre du vouloir d'être une faculté éclairée par l'intelligence en tous ses actes et absolument incapable, par conséquent de se mouvoir  hors des lumières directrices que cell-ci lui fournit... nous devons affirmer que les choix de notre volonté sont nécéssairement conditionés par la présentation que notre intellect nous fournit des valeurs correspondantes, le jugement de valeur étant la lumière directrice sans laquelle notre vouloir ne peut aucunement s'exercer" (I, 200-201). This is why a practico-practical judgment ( presenting the values as to be willed) is a necessary condition for the free action and, as we shall see, for the "jugement de foi."

Furthermore, and for the same reason, the critics' judgments are authoritative only for those who take the appetite of the critics for the right appetite.

Above I underlined the word " know " beause I want to consider the kind of knowledge involved here. Speculative judgments aim at truth as their terminal goal, for the goal of the disinterested, purely intellectual appetite (if such a thing exists) is truth, that is, as indicated by its name, genuine knowledge. Hence they terminate in mere assent, for that achieves the goal of obtaining genuine knowledge, truth. In practical judgments, though, the terminal goal is not their speculative truth, but the satisfaction of the appetite under circumstances of exposure. This is to say that, at least in this case, the content of the practical judgment does not mean object of disinterested assent but object of interested, practical assent which is identical with intentional action under the right circumstances. (Hence Aris' practical syllogism, which is a way of highligting the applicative character of practical understanding ). If the agent believes the critic's judgment, then, under the appropriate circumstances, the agent--by the necessity of practical judgment, a necesity which is not logical but constitutive--will drink the wine recommended by the critic, for practical judgments do not aim at truth as their terminal goal but at the satisfaction of the appetite by means of the agent's action. In other words, practical judgments, precisely because they are not speculative, are applicative, inform action with their applicative intention, be the intention free-deliberative or not.

Because they are essentially applicative, "authenticity" is of the essence in practical judgments (for a practical judgment, being practical, will of necessity terminate in the action to which it disposes intellectually-emotionally, so to say). By contrast, authenticity has no place in the case of speculative judgments whose truth is purely objective (on the side of the object seen by itself) and disinterested (emotionally or appetitively neutral) on the side of the subject. Thus, if under the appropriate circumstances the critic does not drink the wine he or she recommends, one realizes that the critic did not really have the right appetite needed to make the judgment, that is, he or she is not motivated by the wine capable of satisfying his appetite, and therefore his or her judgment is not a genuine judgment for it is totally arbitrary, blind invention.

It seems to me, though, that in this respect there is a disturbing element in the above (de Broglie's) explanation of practical judgments as judgments of value by contrast to speculative judgments as judgments of fact, of what is objectively (i.e., pictorially rather than applicatively) the case. Indeed, the explanation given may suggest, on the one hand, that appetites are blind, brute desires or repulsions simply caused rather than motivated by their object or by the self-motivating subject, and, on the other hand, that judgments of fact are purely objective, without any connection with appetite. I think, by contrast, that practical intelligence or reason (or nous ) is, as Aris suggests by contrast to speculative reason, a different faculty, a faculty that is sighted thanks to its being affectionate and that is affectionate thanks to its being sighted. In other words, intelligent affection, or affective intelligence in an exposed agent is, so to say, the definition of practical reason. I think, moreover, that speculative reason is parasitic on practical reason, for the former is reflective. Moreover, when it is given the primacy it creates a mess. Indeed, precisely because it is reflective in the objectifying sense, it tends to separate what is inseparable and actually constitutes a single complex process, and to hypostasize what it reflects upon thereby depriving it of its applicative character.

Practical knowledge, as Aris indicates in the Metaphysics and in the DMA, is connected with teleological motion, and practical intentional knowledge is connected with locomotion. The telos is the satisfaction of a need through (transitive) action, but the need may or may not be experienced, that is, mediate the action by being a conscious need. In the case of genuinely 'intentional knowledge' the need is informed by directive desire of particular object that satisfies the need as to its ultimate goal. There are, of course, different levels of intentional action, the highest of which involves the invention of object desired and of the means to realize the object desired, as in the case of work (agriculture).

Saying that the appetite is sighted is a way of indicating that, in its highest forms, it involves an intentional

teleology of which the subject is in a certain way in charge instead of executing it blindly but which is not arbitrary, not independent of the characteristics of its object. This is where freedom and decision intervene, which are neither blind nor based on knowledge. Indeed, "blind" and "based on knowledge" are opposite, mutually exclusive categories of speculative, merely sighted, disinterested reason, which do not apply in the sphere of exposure and practical reason, at least not on the level of its highest forms. The prudent (provident) possesses pro-videntia , a sort of fore- vision animated by the right appetite and which is impossible without the right appetite, for it is precisely the correlate of the right appetite, according to which the prudent chooses to act. But this fore-vision, which is akin to desirous-expectation, is not true or false in terms of speculative or pictorial conformity. It is 'true' as the fore-vision of the hunting archer who having chosen to kill the prey (gerundive occidenda ) sees it applicatively at the moment of shooting. Was his fore-vision true? Well, he chose to kill the prey, and his desirous vision was part of the process that led to the achievement of the goal.

But wouldn't de Broglie agree with this? I am not sure, for he is higly ambiguous. (See I, 185 ff., and II, 113-114, and 108 quoted above against the primacy of practical reason in Aquinas's views). He seems to make the judgment of existence a matter of speculative vision ("this is coffee"--"this is revealed by God," in the case of faith), and the value judgment ("this is better coffee than that," "this deserves to be believed in obedient homage to God," in the case of faith) a matter of practical reason (?). (Put this together with the uniqueness of faith as the only case of a free and yet absolutely certain judgment, II, p. 101).

On I, 185-190 sur "La vérité des jugements de valeur" d'après Aristote et Saint Thomas, he presents his views on the truth of practical judgments by contrast to the truth of speculative judgments. On II, pp. 113-114 he applies it to the act of faith as far as the credibility of the revealed is concerned.

He prefaces his exposition concerning the latter with the following: "Cette connaissance [certaine de la crédibilité surnaturelle de la  révélation] se distingue par son objet propre de l'adhésion de foi elle-même. En tout acte de vertu, il faut, en effet, distinguer le jugement spéculativo pratique concret qui est une condition préalable de notre choix, et par lequel nous connaissons cet acte comme digne d'être choisi par nous, d'avec l'acte que notre vouloir exécute ou qu'il commande en vertu du choix qu'il fait. Autre chose est de percevoir comme bon de donner une aumône à tel pauvre, autre chose de donner effectivement cette aumône. Il n'y a pas a raisonner autrement dans le cas de la foi." Here, then, is his application of this reasoning to the case of faith:

Firstly and concerning the "jugement de foi" " que Dieu a révélé ceci ou cela," it is one portion or aspect of that to which we give our intellectual assent commanded by our will in the act of faith. (In other words, the fact that what we believe is revealed by God --and thus to be believed religiously as an homage to God (?) * --is itself a constitutive of the act of faith to be believed. [ * The question mark indicates that I am not sure that the portion "and thus to be believed..." represents de Broglie's view. Indeed, he distinguishes as two different judgments the "jugement de foi" from the "jugement de crédibilité," and makes of the latter a condition of the former. I think, on the contrary, that the two are one and the same]. This is a " jugement spéculatif," portant sur une "vérité spéculative," namely "que Dieu a révélé" ceci ou cela . This is a "jugement de foi," from which he distinguishes the "jugement de crédibilité surnaturelle"].

Secondly and concerning the "jugement de crédibilité surnaturelle," which is concretely " the knowledge that conditions the commandment of the will" involved in the act of faith . Its object is "l'éminente valeur morale concrète d'une action libre a exécuter par nous présentement, car ce que le jugement de crédibilité nous manifeste, c'est très précisement qu'il est bon et obligatoire pour nous de donner un assentiment spéculatif absolu à l'origine divine de la doctrine que l'Eglise nous propose, ou (ce qui est tout un) que le jugement qui affirme cette origine divine est pleinment digne d'être admis par nous absolument ."  Now, this judgment of credibility has a certain similarity to our speculativo-practical judgments. Indeed, to the knowledge involved in the judgment of credibility "on ne peut pas... appliquer sans restriction le terme de 'connaissance spéculativo-pratique' (puisqu'elle se réfère finalement à cette opération propre de l'intellect spéculatif qui est l'acte de foi), mais qui a tout de même avec nos autres jugements spéculativo-pratiques cette analogie fondamentale: qu'elle a pour objet l'éminente valeur morale concrète d'une action libre a exécuter par nous" (the free action being, in this case, the intellectual assent to the speculative judgment of faith that God revealed this, whereas in the normal case of speculativo-practical judgments the term is not another judgment but an action).

Thirdly and concerning the differences between the "jugement de foi" and the "jugement de crédibilité suranturelle":

(a) The former "a pour objet propre de référer les énonciables révelés à leur source divine"; donc "nous nous prononçons par un jugment [spéculatif] d'existence sur une action faite par Dieu. By contrast, the latter "se borne a discerner dans ces mêmes énonciables leur aptitude concrète à être utilisés par nous pour un acte ayant une bonté sui generis d'hommage à rendre à Dieu, aptitude qui s'énoncerait "Cela mérite d'être librement cru être une parole divine"; donc "nous nous prononçons par un jugment [quasi spéculativo-pratique] de valeur sur une action excellemment bonne à faire par nous.

(b) The jugement de foi est cru, whereas the jugment de crédibilité est vu: "Quand un homme vertueux fait une bonne action, on doit dire que cette action lui appartient comme l'objet propre de son choix, comme choisie par lui. Mais la connaissance spéculative pratique, qui conditionne et éclaire son choix en lui montrant cette action comme digne d'être choisie, n'est pas, elle, l'objet de son choix , comme si sa volonté actuelle spécifiait cette connaissance a son gré. Il s'agit au contraire d' une connaissance qui l'éclaire et le dirige en s'imposant à lui (bien qu'elle puisse dépendre en partie de ses vertus precédemment acquises). De la règle d'action que cette connaissance propose il faut dire que l'homme est libre de la suivre ou non, de la considérer ou non, mais non pas de la confectionner ou de la supprimer à son gre. Il en va proportionnellement de même dans la foi . Ce que le croyant choisit, c'est très précisément le jugement ferme qu'il porte sur le fait de la révélation (connaissance de fait). Et voilà pourquoi ce fait, n'étant admis que par un jugement libre quant à sa spécification, est un jugment cru et non pas vu . Par contre, la connaissance de valeur qui conditionne cette adhésion en montrant au sujet qu'il peut louablement former ce jugement ou (ce qui est tout un) que le jugement de foi peut et doit être accepté n'est pas le terme de son choix volontaire. Tout ce que le sujet pourrait faire, ce serait de détourner son regard de cette obligation , et de n'y plus penser. Mais dès qu'elle lui apparaît, elle lui apparaît non comme choisie par lui, mais comme s'imposant à lui . Et puisque toute adhesion intellectuelle subie et non choisie est vision [MAIS L'ACCEPTATION D'UNE OBLIGATION D'AGIR PEUT-ELLE ETRE PUREMENT INTELLECTUELLE? ] (de même que toute adhésion intellectuelle librement choisie est croyance), il faut dire, sous peine de tout brouiller, et de retirer à la foi ce qui est essentiel à tout acte de vertu, que le croyant voit qu'il peut et doit croire (selon le mode caractéristique que la foi surnaturelle réclame) et donc qu'il voit la crédibilité surnaturelle de l'objet à croire . Là est exactement la condition la plus fondamentale de la rationalite de notre foi , celle dont rien ne peut nous dispenser, puisque la foi, si elle en était démunie cesserait de remplir les conditions essentielles d'un acte vertueux." (See p. 112: " La rationalité de la foi est donc à expliquer par le fait que la foi suppose une connaissance certaine de la crédibilité surnaturelle de la révélation . Pour qu'un acte de vertu soit 'raisonnable', il faut et il suffit que l'agent connaisse avec certitude que cet acte concret peut louablement être fait par lui, ou (ce qui revient au même) que l'objet de cet acte peut être louablement choisi par son vouloir."   

As for me, I think that de Broglie got it all wrong. To begin with, "This is coffee" is closer to a value judgment, une connaissance de valeur, than to a judgement of fact or of existence, in that it involves the affectivity of the exposed subject.

^(F24) De Broglie's distinction between judgments of fact and judgments of value rests on the assumption of the validity of the Aristotelian (or at least Thomist) understanding of the distinction between speculative and practical reason. It is the very validity of that distinction that I reject. The primacy belongs to the vulnerable agent in situation of exposure. Speculative reason is only a variety of practical reason (understood as the reason of the exposed agent) when the agent is not in immediate situation of exposure (because cares have been momentarily neutralized), and not under the structuring influence of a goal. The applicative character of the supposedly speculative knowledge is revealed in the moment of actual or projected exposure.    

Coffee as a beverage in our culture (of which we speak and which we drink or abstain from drinking) came to existence by reference to the appetite it satisfied. Saying therefore "This is coffee" is saying "this is capable of satisfying the appetite coffee satisfies, in the way coffee satisfies it and with the side-effects coffee has," much as saying "This coffee is better than that" is saying that this coffee is more capable than that of better satisfying the appetite coffee satisfies."

Am I therefore denying speculative reason? The least I am doing is denying it primacy, subordinating it to practical reason, which is something Aquinas-de Broglie oppose because it leads to pragmatism and relativism (see de Broglie I, 108, quoted above). In fact, however, I am redefining speculative and practical reason (cf. the preceding footnote) in a way that involves the subordination of speculative to practical reason and that presupposes the naturalistic chopping off of the world of which I will speak now.

In DMA Aristotle introduces a classification of motion that goes from the reflexes of the simplest organisms to the deliberative realization of a goal in adult humans. Now, "motion" differs from what Descartes called "thought" in significant ways, but it also differs from the mechanical movement of biological or non-biological bodies as conceived by Descartes. In fact, what Aris calls "motion" is an activity of living (that is, biological-teleological) organisms, exclusively.

Thought is, in Descartes' view, purely internal to the subject and therefore, by itself, it changes nothing in the external world. Its transitivity is purely internal, thinking-a thought. If motion is considered within this Cartesian framework that begins with Descartes' individual experience as the attempt to realize an epistemic project and that chops off reality in terms of internal and external, which is the same as experienciable only by the subject, and observable, then motion is to be classified as external by contrast to thought.

Now, the "motion" of which we are talking about here presupposes an entirely different way of chopping off reality--that is, the totality--and, consequently an entirely different relationship between the subject and the rest--that is, the surrounding world. One way of adumbrating the difference is to say that the Cartesian way of chopping off is determined by an unsituated, solitary subject whose only desire is to know in the sense of contemplating what is the case. The distinction between external and internal is based on the feeling-quality of the subject's experiences, some being felt-experienced and unobervable because immaterial or unextended, others being observed and observable because material or extended. By contrast, the chopping off presupposed by "motion" is the practical chopping off of an exposed subject-object who when he or she reflects discovers himself or herself already exposed , and together with other subject-objects participating in the action both in a passive and in an active capacity. In this sense, "motion" is neither internal nor external, for certain motions incarnate intentions which transform the causal order, and the subject of such motions is vulnerable to motions that change the desiring subject. For Descartes, an intentional action, in the sense of movement of an extended substance, would be a contradiction in terms, for the body, even though substantially united to a mind, remains mindless, a mere thing that carries out mechanically or causally a program, a portion of the external-causal order.

Some existentialists--Marcel, Merleau-Ponty, Sartre-- carrying Descartes' observation that the soul is not in the body as the pilot in a ship, have persuasively shown that "the body"--at least the thinking subject's body--is neither external nor internal. However, they, or at least some of them like Sartre and Merleau, tried to make of the body the key or matrix not only for an alternative chopping off of reality but, at the same time, for an alternative, non-Cartesian epistemology--an epistemology being a particular project of justifying knowledge or of specifying the conditions under which it is justified and needs no justification. They, in other words, changed the way of beginning, but not the philosophical project of justifying knowledge, of guaranteeing knowledge, and they failed as much as their Cartesian predecessors failed . They had a different, non-Cartesian epistemology, but an epistemology nonetheless, which kept alive the primacy of epistemology typical of the philosophical project.

^(F25) Also typical of the philosophical project, on the side of the commonsensical realists, which are only the other side of the coin of Cartesianism, is "the primacy of metaphysics." For metaphysics is the theory of the reality known , of the objective correlate of the mental picture.  

Aristotle's case is more complex and truly baffling. Indeed, in one of his conceptions he was a "naturalist' who did not need any justification for knowledge for he found himself in the midst of an already existing particular world, and in his other conception an epistemologist who tried to integrate the speculative knowledge of a contemplator with the practical knowledge of a vulnerable agent into a total picture. The two conceptions are incompatible with each other.

What is the alternative?

First of all, it cannot be the total suppresion of reflection, were it not but for the fact that other people reflect and might take their ideology for the true one and

attempt to argue others into it as imperative. Thus, the epistemological project needs perpetual debunking, for it has a vitality of its own. Its vitality results from the fact that the person who accepts that there is no reflective justification of knowledge cuts the ground under his or her own feet, not only under those of his or her adversaries, and seems to have no escape but either relativism-emotivism or skepticism. It is to be remarked, however, that these 'isms' are themselves the product of the failure of an assumed epistemology that attributes primacy to speculative reason and defines truth as conformity between the mind and what is not the mind. Thus the necessity of these "isms" is just a mirage for the naturalist vulnerable agent of practical reason--'the good sophist'--who not only does not need to justify with evidence in order to act or to state but considers such an attempt wrongheaded and explainable.

There is a second sense in which 'reflection' cannot be short-circuited. Namely, in the sense of participatory meditation by believers on the object of the decision of faith and its demands concerning future decisions of faith. This is what intra-Christian preaching is about. And, with confidence in God's activity, the extra-Christian-community preaching of the missionary.

Finally, there is a third sense in which 'reflection' cannot be short-circuited, for whether or not we like it, we Christians share the world with non-Christians, and our dialogue with them demands reflection. However, it is, again, participatory (rather than contemplative, epocheic, epistemological) reflection , that is, it is reflection by committed agents whose commitments of exposure are different. All we can do here is compare notes as pilgrims, in the hope that God in his own good kairos will do his work.

    

Autre chose..., autre chose...

"Autre chose est de percevoir comme bon de donner une aumône à tel pauvre, autre chose de donner effectivement cette aumône" (De Broglie, p. 113).

This connects with authenticity and, thus, with the exposed agent.

In a trivial sense, de Broglie is right. The situation he describes happens sometimes. Otherwise inauthenticity would be impossible. But what he implies--and this is not trival at all--is that the practical judgment is complete by judging, without the corresponding action.

I disagree. I claim that the paradigmatic case of paractical judgment is the one in which the corresponding action completes the judgment as a further moment of the judgment, not the one de Broglie takes as paradigmatic, in which judgment remains practical judgment whether or not the corresponding moment of action follows. What the Broglie takes for his model of practical judgment is a failed practical judgment, which is to say that it is not a practical judgment. 'Perceiving' that I should give is a moment of the proces of giving, as far as the practical agent is concerned. This 'perceiving' takes place at the moment of decision, when the agent chooses something as his or her goal; in fact, it coincides with decision. Therefore, not giving amounts to not perceiving practically that I should give, to not judging practically, for what characterizes practical judgment is that it terminates in the corresponding intentional action, under the right conditions of exposure.   

Aris recognized this in his analysis of the practical syllogism which 'of necessity,' that is, by virtue of its nature, terminates in action, as far as the subject is concerned. Camus recognized the same in what I call his principle of authenticity: "For a person who does not cheat, what he believes to be true must determine his action." In other words, authenticity is not an addition to practical judgment, it is the definition of practical judgment , because practical judgment is not a speculative, disinterested grasp or perception of the object by a speculative subject; it is, rather, an interested, appetitive perception of an appetized object by an exposed subject --in this example, as pauper donandus-mihi . If I do not give, I did not decide to give, I did not 'perceive' the pauper as donandus and myself as donator. The judging agent constitutes the object as appetendum-sibi, and the appetized object co-constitutes the agent as appetitive by showing itself capable of satisfying his or her appetite.

Wherein, then, lies the truth of practical judgments, and what kind of truth is it? [SEE DE BROGLIE ON FALSITY IN PRACTICAL JUDGMENTS]. NO AUTHENTICITY OR INAUTHENTICITY IN ANIMALS.

Certainly a purely contemplative, invulnerable, needless subject cannot make practical judgments, for practical judgments  are judgments of objects of appetite and of appetitive action which, as such, can be perceived only by an appetizing subject. Speculative judgments, by contrast, deal with objects of mere assent, not of appetition. Now, an object is object of appetition only when, under the appropriate conditions of exposure, it is actually appetized through action. Actually, decision is the very choice to appetize practically an object by discovering practically its appetibility for me and, thefore, by responding to its appetibility through intentional action.

If, under the appropriate conditions of exposure, there is no actual appetition-action corresponding to the judgment, there is no practical judgment at all. Or, rather, there is practical judgment, but not the judgment we claim. If I do not give money to this poor man, I really judged that giving him money was not what I shoud do.

^(F26) Inauthenticity as the discordance between what one says that one 'perceives' and what one actually 'perceives' or judges is possible. But inauthenticity as the discordance between what one actually 'perceives' or judges and what one does is not possible. One's actions always correspond to one's real evaluations. We are what we do, not what we say or what we say we would wish to do.

The practical judgment is not, at least not primarily, speculative affirmation of the appetibility of the object, to wit, that this object is capable of satisfying a certain appetite, but appetizing it dispositionally and, under the appropriate circumstances, pursuing it accordingly. In other words, it is not a matter of seeing and affirming that it is appetible, but of voting with one's feet as to its appetibility for me-- donandus mihi --by appetizing and pursuing it. Since nothing is affirmed, there can be no question of truth in the sense of the correspondence between what is affirmed and what is the case.

^(F27) In the case of the speculative judgment, as understood by Aris and Aquinas, the judgment is a reflective act, because it reflects on what is to be judged and then affirms or denies or abstains from either, depending on whether sufficient reason is found or not. But practical judgment does not aim at finding out what is the case in itself or objectively and assenting to it, but at acting appropriately in response to what is the case in relation to us and changing what is the case. What is being judged here is not the corrrespondence between what one thinks and what is the case in itself independently of its relation to us, but between what one wants and what is the case as it affects us. The point here is not to see passively but to change actively. Practical judgment terminates in action. In the case of the speculative judgment, the judge by judging comes to se e what is the case. In the case of practical judgment, the agent by deciding comes to gear his or her action according to his appetite of object.

 

But is not this appetizing and pursuing an implicit affirmation of the appetibility of the object? The answer is no, if by affirming the appetibility of the object we understand a statement that the object is objectively appetible. Rather, saying that it is appetible should be heard applicatively, as an invitation to appetize it. Appetizing and pursuing are ultimately the only way to judge the object appetizing, and this cannot be reduced to believing that the object is appetizing. This is why, as Aris remarked, the conclusion of the practical syllogism is an action, not an affirmation however categorical and sincere of the appetibility of the object. The illusion that practical judgments are true in the sense of speculative judgments arises from the fact that the person who finds an object appetible, will, if asked, answer that he believes that the object is appetible. But what the person means is not that this statement is to be assented to, but his or her practical disposition to pursue this object under the appropriate conditions of exposure. Consequently he could not state and believe that the object is appetible if he did not appetize it, and the fact that he appetizes it is independent from his affirming that the 0object is appetible . In short, a practical judgment is not, and cannot be reduced to, a speculative judgment that. Thus the appetizing involved in a practical judgment is not believing that, nor does it presuppose such a belief.

Yet, a practical judgment is indeed a judgment, not just a blind or programmed motion toward an object. This is why the agent bears responsibility for his or her actions, and why animals who move toward an object according to their natural program do not bear responsibility. Furthermore, the mature agent deliberates. And when there is deliberation in common the deliberating agents give arguments to each other. Hence, it seems, the issue of the truth of practical judgments is not out of place in their regard. But the question is what kind of truth.

The discussion among deliberating agents aims at appropriate action, not at assent that something is the case. Therefore, as to the argument concerning the object, when it is matter of showing that something possesses x characteristics, the characteristics shown are such as to affect the deliberating  agents and make the object appetible to them. Assent, therefore, is desirous-applicative assent, that is, not assent to a proposition but consent to pursue the object. The argument regards the object as appetible to the subject by creating in the subject the disposition to pursue it . The attempt is to show that the object possesses the qualities that correspond to the actual appetite of the subject. Other arguments regard directly the subject in order to make him or her appetize the appropriate object, given what he or she is, his or her actual real needs. In the first case, the attempt is to modify the appetitive, applicative perception of object; in the second case, the attempt is to bring the subject's needs to his or her consciousness so as to appetize the object. In both cases--and this is what will take place at the moment of decision--the attempt is to match the subject's appetite with the object perceived.

Thus there can be no question of truth as correspondence between the affirmation of appetibility of the object and its actual, objective appetibility, for no such appetibility is affirmed. Nor can the disagreement between two deliberators who make different choices be settled by appeal to the objective appetibility of the object, for objective appetibility amounts to appetibililty that corresponds to no appetite, and this is an oxymoron. Thus, if by truth we understand that on  which all rational agents ought to agree by virtue of their rationality, there is no truth in practical judgments. However, this does not imply that  

Yet Aquinas speaks of the truth of practical judgments and defines it as the "conformity of the practical judgment [of the appetibility of an object, that is, of its capacity to satisfy a given appetite] and the right appetite. The right appetite is the appetition of the object genuinely capable of satisfying it, and the practical judgment judges the object's ability to satisfy the right appetite.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

^(F1)
^(F2)
^(F3)
^(F4)
^(F5)
^(F6)
^(F7)
^(F8)
^(F9)
^(F10)
^(F11)
^(F12)
^(F13)
^(F14)
^(F15)
^(F16)
^(F17)
^(F18)
^(F19)
^(F20)
^(F21)
^(F22)
^(F23)
^(F24)
^(F25)
^(F26)
^(F27)
